“What if someone were to tell you that
there’s a region in the world where
roughly 90% of the world’s earthquakes
occur. What if they were to tell you that
this region is also home to over 75% of
the world’s active and dormant
volcanoes, and all but 3 of the world’s 25
largest eruptions in the last 11,700 years
took place here?

                  Matt Williams
                  www.universetoday.com




Earthquake and
Tsunami Version 2
                                                                            1



                          CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
 BACKGROUND ……………………………………………………………………..………………                          2
 TERMINOLOGIES ………………………………………………………………………………                           9
 ACRONYMS………………………………………………………………………………………….                           13
CHAPTER II
 THE NDRP FOR EARTHQUAKE AND TSUNAMI
   What is NDRP? ……………………………………………………………………………..…                      16
   Where is NDRP applicable? ……………………………………………………………..….               17
   When is NDRP activated? ……………………………………………………………..……                 18
   Who are the Key Players? ………………………………………………………………......             24
   How NDRP works? ………………………………………………………………..………....                   27
CHAPTER III
 NDRP BRIDGING AND COORDINATING MECHANISMS
   Philippine Response Cluster System (RCS) ……………………………………...…...      30
   Incident Command System (ICS) ………………………………………………….……...             31
   Interoperability of RC and IMT ……………………………………………………….….             33
   Co-Location Strategy ……………………………………………………………………..….                 34
   Coordination with the Militaries –AFP ……………………………………….………           35
   Coordination with the International Humanitarian Communities ……….   36
CHAPTER IV
 ACTIVITIES, COMMON TOOLS AND SERVICES
   Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA) …………….....…..    38
   Common and Fundamental Operational Data Sets (CAFOD) and
   Information Management-Technical Working Group (IM-TWG) ……....…     39
   Response Cluster’s Information Management System …………………….…..       41
ANNEX
   Incident Management Team …………… ……………………………………..……..…..              43
   Lead Cluster Operational Guidelines ……………………………………..……..…..         44
REFERENCES ……………………………………………………………………………..………. 106
                                                                                                                 2


                                          CHAPTER I
              “In disaster response management operations, we abide by the formula:
              P + P + P = O as our mathematical binding principle, anchored on the
              whole-of-nation approach which purports that Public + Private + People
              is equal to Zero Casualty.”
                                                  -LtC Edwin C. Sadang, GSC (SC)


 This chapter provides a general background of the NDRP, including the common terminologies and
 acronyms used in this document. It covers the Rationale and Objectives of the NDRP, and the Bases of
 Actions.



BACKGROUND
The Philippines is wedged in the Pacific Ring of Fire which is a 40,000 km horseshoe-shaped basin
that is associated with a nearly continuous series of oceanic trenches, volcanic arcs, and volcanic
belts and/or plate movements. This ring accounts for 452 volcanoes (active and dormant),
stretching from the southern tip of South America, up along the coast of North America, across the
Bering Strait, down through Japan, and into New Zealand – with several active and dormant
volcanoes in Antarctica closing the ring. The Ring of Fire as shown in Figure 1, is the direct result of
plate tectonics and the movement and collisions of lithospheric plates. These plates, which
constitute the outer layer of the planet, are constantly in motion atop the mantle. Sometimes they
collide, pull apart, or slide alongside each other; resulting in convergent boundaries, divergent
boundaries, and transform boundaries. (http://www.universetoday.com/59341/pacific-ring-of-
fire/)




Figure 1. The Pacific Ring of Fire, a string of volcanic regions extending from the South Pacific to South America.
          Credit: http://www.universetoday.com/59341/pacific-ring-of-fire
                                                                                                       3

It is considered as a critical region for it serves as one of the primary border regions for the tectonic
plates of over half of the world, thereby affecting millions of people living in these areas. In reality,
there is usual difficulty that the countries situated here have to confront with volcanic eruptions or
earthquakes and even tsunamis. Given our disaster risk profile, Republic Act (RA) 10121,
otherwise known as the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010”,
was enacted on 27 May 2010. This law paved the way for the institutionalization of the
proactive Disaster Risk Reduction and Management or “DRRM” approach, which is the
“systematic process of using administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills
and capacities to implement strategies, policies and improved coping capacities in order to
lessen the adverse impacts of hazards and the possibility of disaster.”


The Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010 strengthens the Philippines’
implementation of actions and measures for direction and mitigation in catastrophes and is a very
                            important step towards achievement of an enhanced response
                            program for disaster risk reduction. Based on the provisions “the
                            participation of civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector
                            and volunteers in the government’s disaster risk reduction programs
                            towards complementation of resources and effective delivery of services
                            to the citizenry”, the government can direct other groups in the
                            country to join resources towards the domain of disaster risk and
                            reduction management programs. This opens up institutional
                            capacity to bolster good relationships among response operations
                            key players that may result to institutional interoperability.

                             As such, the Philippine Government, through the National Disaster
                             Risk Reduction Management Council (NDRRMC) has formulated
                             several memorandums, guidelines, and protocols that call for a more
                             efficient and effective mitigation of, preparedness for, response to,
                             and recovery from earthquake and tsunami disasters. The Version 2
                             of the NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami is an enhancement of the
                             first version that has been promulgated based from the formal
meeting and approval of the NDRRMC on June 2015. This applies to earthquake, tsunami and other
related events.

The NDRP is a strategic plan that provides general directions for all the agencies and networks
involved in disaster risk reduction and management (DRRM). It necessitates the Operational Plan
at the agency and regional levels, and Tactical or Contingency Plan at the Local Government Units
(LGU) to fully enact the directives and realize its objectives.

The current work focuses on the 3rd component of the four (4) thematic areas in Disaster Risk
Reduction Management, the Emergency Response. It is the common hope and prayers of both the
emergency managers and responders, as well as the participants of the review workshop, that the
present work would ultimately lead to a more resilient, adaptive, safer, and productive Philippines.

Therefore, this plan provides the all-encompassing embraces of the stratagem to achieve
appropriate actions and prompt response. It shall be extended by subsequent program and guiding
principles that shall be required to provide supplementary guidance to NDRRMC member agencies.
The NDRP shall be in an endless process of enhancement, fine-tuning, and modification as may be
deemed necessary. In entirety, the NDRP is our obligation to the realization of our goal of saving
lives, protection of properties, and zero casualty.
                                                                                                    4

Objectives of the NDRP

NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami is the National Government’s
strategic action in providing response assistance for managing the
consequences of these two (2) hazards and its potential risks. It aims
to ensure the timely, effective and coordinated response by the
National Government including its instrumentalities by providing
support assistance to the areas that will be affected by these
disasters. The NDRP acknowledges and supports the principles of the
Local Government Code (RA 7160) wherein all LGUs are mandated to
prepare and render response for all eventualities of disaster within
their boundaries.

The NDRP embraces all conceivable contingencies, making use of all
available resources from the government, non-government
organizations, private sectors, volunteer groups and other response
operations key actors. It promotes self-reliance and mutual-help, with
the full utilization of available resources before seeking assistance from neighboring or higher
entities. Since emergency response is a joint responsibility of the national and local governments,
its effectiveness will depend largely on the level of preparedness done by the different levels of the
local government units (Province, City and Municipality) as well as that of the field offices and
attached agencies of the different national government agencies. The manner of response that will
be provided by the National Government through this NDRP heavily relies on the capacities and
capabilities of the different levels of the local government. It is important that the LGUs are
well-versed on Disaster Preparedness Plan              as a foundation for effective response
operations.


NDRP in Perspective
The NDRP is the Government of the Philippines’ “multi-hazard” response plan. Emergency
management as defined in the NDRRM Act of 2010 (RA 10121), is the organization and
management of resources to address all aspects or phases of the emergency, mitigation of,
preparedness for, response to and recovery from a disaster or emergency. The Department of
Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) with Office of Civil Defense (OCD), in consultation with
NDRRMC member agencies developed the NDRP. It outlines the processes and mechanisms to
facilitate a coordinated response by the national and/or at the local level departments/agencies.
Local government institutions are responsible for the development and improvement of local
response plans relative to their areas of responsibility and underlying risks. The relationship
between the NDRP and other plans in national and local levels is shown in Figure 2.
                                                                                                                                    5


                                       RA 10121
                               Prevention and Mitigation                Mitigation      Preparedness
                               Preparedness
             NDRRMP            Response                                                   Recovery
                               Rehabilitation and Recovery              NDRP


                                    Cluster Operational Guidelines / SOP (Annex of NDRP)


               NDRRMC                                                                     Manual of Operations
               Member           DRRMP (Each Department)
               Organizations                                                                   NDRRMC
                                 Mitigation Plan      Preparedness Plan
                                                                                       Manual of Operations / SOPs
                                 Response Plan               R&R Plan                            (Central Office)


                                                                                     RDRRMCs      (OpCens)
                                                                                            RDRRMCs
               Regional DRRMPs                                                        ManualofofOperations/SOPs
                                                                                     Manual      Operations
                                                                                        (Regional Offices)
                                                                                          (Regional Offices)

                                                                                                       National Governments LEVEL
                                                                                                         Local Governments LEVEL

               P/C/M/B DRRMPs                                      Manual of Operations (LGUs’ Offices)

                                                                          Contingency Plans (LGUs’ Offices)


      Figure 2. NDRP in Perspective

The NDRP prescribes the relevant activities on how the disaster response shall be conducted as
augmentation or assumption of response functions to the disaster affected LGUs as a result of
earthquake and tsunami. The contents of the NDRP also include identifying roles and
responsibilities of organizations/institutions during disaster/emergency phase as leads and
members of the Response Cluster. The details of the actions or procedures are further
discussed in the “Operations Protocol” provided in Chapter 3.

Necessity of the NDRP
As stipulated in the NDRRM Act, amongst the tasks of the NDRRMC
are the development of coordination mechanisms and the
identification of activities to achieve coherence in the
implementation of DRRM policies. The Office of Civil Defense (OCD)
is mandated to develop and ensure the implementation of national
standards in coordination with the concerned government offices in
carrying out disaster risk reduction programs.         It includes
preparedness, response and rehabilitation works, from data
collection and analysis, planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation together with the Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD) as Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response.
The specific task of the NDRRMC through OCD is to facilitate
coordination, mobilize resources for response and information
management including communications.

The NDRP contains the following contents:

  The Level of Actions at the different levels of command;
  The Emergency Response Preparedness (ERP) commonly
                                                                                                     6

     known as Pre-Disaster Risk Assessment – Actions, Plans, and Protocols (PDRA-APP);
    The Response Cluster (RC) and Incident Management Team (IMT) Mechanisms;
    Level of Response at the different levels of command;
    Triggers for Response Activations;
    The eleven (11) Response Clusters that were created to have a focused response operations on
     the field as well as be able to directly and efficiently coordinate with the existing Humanitarian
     Clusters of the International Humanitarian Country Teams;
    Roles and Responsibilities of each Lead and Member Cluster that is to take quick and proper
     actions are clarified when the disaster occurs;
    Predictable leadership and participation to ensure coordination - cluster leadership, and
     participation roles of member organizations/agencies that are clarified in each activity per
     disaster phase;
    Operation Protocols of Response Clusters that are prepared to guide the coordination that
     must be done and coming from the National Government to the affected LGUs needing the
     augmentation or assumption support;
    The NDRP that has both national and regional components which provide the framework for
     effective interphase of response efforts through vertical and horizontal coordination; and
    The context of NDRP that does not replace event specific, departmental or agency plans but is
     used as reference to achieve complementation.

Bases of Actions Plan
Scenario Based
The NDRP is formulated under the premise of a “worst-case
scenario” for each type of disasters that lead to disaster or calamity.
The DSWD as Vice-Chairperson for Response together with the
eleven (11) Response Clusters agreed on this approach as they
believed that earthquakes and tsunamis may lead to major
disasters or emergencies and can cause mass casualties, massive
destruction of public/private properties and livelihoods, and
disruption of normal life saving-support systems. And under a
“worst-case scenario”, the different government agencies, local
government units and their respective offices in the different
regional offices will be best prepared to respond according to their
respective capacity and capability.

Tiered Response
The type of response for consequence management that the NDRP
is providing is at the level of the National Government and has two
approaches to consider: 1) for augmentation to the operations of
the affected LGUs and, 2) for assumption of functions of the LGUs in
providing response assistance to their affected population. Both
approaches take into consideration the level of capacity and
capability of the affected LGU to determine the amount of assistance that will be released and
deployed.
                                                                                                   7

                              The first approach which is that of “augmentation”, the response
                              assistance from the national government will be based on the
                              requests coming from the Regional DRRMCs that have determined
                              their diminishing levels of capacity and capability to provide
                              adequate assistance to their respective provinces, cities and
                              municipalities affected by disaster. The second approach which is
                              that of “assumption” of response activities will commence based on
                              the identified trigger points of which there is confirmation of
                              information coming from the concerned government agencies
                              and/or institutions that the massive impacts are earthquake and
                              tsunami incidents.

                              In that time, national government agencies shall activate their own
                              response team taking initiative for disaster response, such as
                              immediate deployment of Rapid Deployment Team/s (RDT) to
                              conduct disaster operations and RDANA Teams plus aerial surveys.
                              This may result to the activation of the Response Cluster and the
                              establishment of a National Incident Management Team (NIMT) or
                              its counterpart in the different levels of DRRM network as necessary.

                              N/R/LDRRMCs will abide with the Section 1, Rule 11 of the RA
                              10121 to take the lead in preparing for, responding to, and
                              recovering from the impacts of disasters based on the following
criteria:

    a. Barangay Development Committee (BDC) if a barangay is affected;
    b. Municipal/City DRRMC, if two (2) or more barangays are affected;
    c. Provincial DRRMC, if two (2) or more municipalities/cities are affected;
    d. Regional DRRMC, if two (2) or more provinces are affected; and
    e. National DRRMC, if two (2) or more regions are affected.

The NDRRMC and intermediary LDRRMCs shall always act as support to LGUs which have the
primary responsibility as first disaster responders. Private sectors, civil society organizations and
other volunteer groups shall work in accordance with the coordination mechanisms and policies set
by the NDRRMC and concerned LDRRMCs.

Systems and mechanisms that are put in place before a disaster or emergency shall be activated
including the response cluster coordination system, emergency operations center (EOC) and the
incident command system (ICS). This is in line with the provisions of RA 10121 acknowledging the
jurisdictions of the different levels of the local government system and the mandates provided in
the Local Government Code.

The tiered response adheres to the capacity and capability of the LGUs in responding to the needs
of their constituents during times of disaster and thus promotes a system of accountability thru
command control.

    The NDRP is also built on the following understanding:

   a. All government agencies and instrumentalities have their own respective Disaster
Preparedness Plans for Earthquake and Tsunami;
   b. All Local Government Units (LGUs) have prepared their Contingency Plans for Hydro-Met
hazards and implemented their Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plans (LDRRMPs)
within the DRRM Framework of Prevention/Mitigation, Preparedness, programs and
                                                                                                 8

activities that are directly connected to response like prepositioning of key assets and resources;
and

    c. The Cluster Approach System ,Incident Command System and response operations has been
cascaded to all levels of government both national and local.



   BRIDGING MECHANISMS?
                                                                                                    9


TERMINOLOGIES
Capacity is a combination of all strengths and resources available within a community, society or
organization that can reduce the level of risk, or effects of a disaster. Capacity may include
infrastructure and physical means, institutions, societal coping abilities, as well as human
knowledge, skills and collective attributes such as social relationships, leadership and management.
Capacity may also be described as capability.

Collaboration - as mentioned by Denise in his article Collaboration vs. 3Cs, he said that “Michael
Schrage puts it in his book, Shared Minds: ... collaboration is the process of shared creation: two or
more individuals with complementary skills interacting to create a shared understanding that none
had previously possessed or could have come to on their own. Collaboration creates a shared
meaning about a process, a product, or an event. In this sense, there is nothing routine about it.
Something is there that wasn’t there before.

Command and Control -exercise of authority and direction by the Incident Commander
over resources checked-in to accomplish the objectives.

Communications Interoperability - in this study, this is operationally defined as “the capability of
communications equipment to talk to any similar communications equipment operating in the
same electromagnetic spectrum.”

Cooperation as defined operationally by Denise (n.d.) is now a hallmark for not every corporate
behavior, but corporate culture. The message is clear: get with the group. (p.2)

Coordination, like communication, it begins with an assumption of differences. Different persons,
different units, different units create overlap, redundancy and/or separation without coordination.
(Denise, n.d., p.2)

Crisis -also known as emergency;a threatening condition that requires urgent action or
response. – National Crisis Management Core Manual

Crisis Management (CM) - involves plans and institutional arrangement to engage and
guide the efforts of government, non-government, voluntary and private agencies in
comprehensive and coordinated ways to respond to the entire spectrum of crisis needs.

Demobilization -the release and return of resources that are no longer required for the
support of an incident/event.


Disaster is a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving
widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the
ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. Disasters are often
described as a result of the combination of: the exposure to a hazard; the conditions of vulnerability
that are present; and insufficient capacity or measures to reduce or cope with the potential negative
consequences, Disaster impacts may include loss of life, injury, disease and other negative effects on
human, physical, mental and social well-being, together with damage to property, destruction of
assets, loss of services, Social and economic disruption and environmental degradation.
                                                                                                       10

Disaster Response as defined in the RA 10121, is the provision of emergency services and public
assistance during or immediately after a disaster in order to save lives, reduces health impacts,
ensure public safety and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people affected. Disaster response
is predominantly focused on immediate and short-term needs and is sometimes called “disaster
relief”.

Disaster Risk is described by RA 10121, as the potential disaster losses in lives, health status,
livelihood, assets and services, which could occur to a particular community or a society over some
specified future time period.

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) – the systematic process of using
administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills and capacities to implement
strategies, policies, and improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of
hazards and the possibility of disaster. Prospective disaster risk reduction and management refers
to risk reduction and management activities that address and seek to avoid the development of new
or increased disaster risks, especially if risk reduction policies are not put in place. The definition is
taken from RA 10121, p.7

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (DRRMC) - organized body of
government agencies, to include the civil society organizations and private sector,
mandated to undertake DRRM functions from the national to local levels. The composition,
powers and functions of the DRRMC are defined in RA 10121

Earthquake is a term used to describe both sudden slip on a fault, and the resulting ground shaking
and radiated seismic energy caused by the slip, or by volcanic or magmatic activity, or other sudden
stress changes in the earth. The meaning is taken from USGS Earthquake Glossary.

Emergency as per R.A 10121, it is defined as unforeseen or sudden occurrence, especially danger,
demanding immediate action.

Emergency Operations Center (EOC) - facility mandated by RA 10121 to be established in
every DRRMC that shall be operated and staffed on a twenty-four (24) hour basis for
coordination work on DRRM.

Hazard – a dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause
loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihood and services,
social and economic disruption, or environmental damage. – NDRRMOC SOP and Guidelines
2016 Edition

Human-Induced Hazard -human-induced significant incidents resulting in acts of
terrorism, destabilization, criminal activities, and disruption of normal day-to-day
economic activities that require prompt intervention to contain the incident, mitigate the
effects, and normalize the situation.

Incident -an occurrence or event, natural or human-induced, that requires an emergency
response to protect life or property. Incidents can, for example, include major disasters,
emergencies, terrorist attacks, terrorist threats, wildland and urban fires, floods, hazardous
materials spills, nuclear accidents, aircraft accidents, earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes,
tropical storms, war-related disasters, public health and medical emergencies, and other
occurrences requiring an emergency response.
                                                                                               11

Incident Commander (IC) -the individual responsible for all incident activities, including
the development of strategies and tactics and the ordering and the release of resources.
The IC has overall authority and responsibility for conducting incident operations and is
responsible for the management of all incident operations at the incident site.

Incident Command System (ICS) – as defined in the Memo Circular 04, s. 2012, it is a standardized,
on-scene, all hazard incident management concepts; allows its users to adopt an integrated
organizational structure to match the complexities and demands of single or multiple incidents
without being hindered by jurisdictional boundaries. ICS is non-permanent organization and is
activated only in response to disasters and emergencies.

Information Communications Technology (ICT) is defined operationally as “the umbrella term
that includes any communication device or application, encompassing: radio, television, cellular
phones, computer and network hardware and software, satellite systems and so on, as well as the
various services and applications associated with them, such as videoconferencing and distance
learning”. The meaning is taken from http://searchcio-midmarket.techtarget.com/definition/ICT

Incident Management Team (IMT) - a team composed of Command Staff and General Staff
who will take the lead in ICS implementation.

Information Sharing as defined by http://www.techopedia.com /definition/24839/ information-
sharing is the exchange of data between various organizations, people and technologies. It has
several types; Information shared by individuals, shared by organizations and shared between
firmware/hardware.

Key Players (actors, players, responders, enablers). This term is generally used in this paper as
an organization, agency, individual, government, private or business that is involved in a HADR
with other key players.

Operations Center – an operating facility to be established by the NDRRMC, DRRMC and LDRRMCs
as required by RA 10121. It shall be operated and staffed on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. During
emergencies, the Operations Center shall be activated into an “Emergency Operations Center.

Operational Protocol is operationally defined in this document as a procedural process on how to
systematically carry out disaster management operations. It is the standard rules that govern all
disaster management operators.

Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA) -a disaster response mechanism
that is used immediately in the early emergency phase to determine the extent of impacts
and assess the priority needs of the communities.

Resources - machineries, manpower, methodology, materials, and monetary assets that can
be drawn on by an organization in order to function effectively.

Risk - the combination of the probability of an event and its negative consequences.

Risk Assessment - a methodology to determine the nature and extent of risk by analyzing
potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could
potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihood and the environment on
which they depend

Response Clusters -Response Clusters are part of the NDRRMC’s strategic action on
                                                                                               12

providing humanitarian assistance and disaster response services. These are organized
groups of government agencies that are designated to undertake coordination functions at
the strategic level to provide resource support for tactical response.

Responsible Official (RO) -the overall in charge of an agency, organization or institution
who has the full authority for making decisions and providing directions to manage an
incident or planned event within his/her jurisdiction. The RO is usually the Chairperson of
the DRRMC, the Crisis Manager of the Crisis Management Committee, the head of an agency
or organization, or any individual vested with authority as mandated by law according to
his/her respective jurisdiction.


State of Calamity - a condition involving mass casualty and/or major damages to property,
disruption of means of livelihoods, roads, communications, and normal way of life of people in the
affected areas as a result of the occurrence of natural or human-induced hazard.

Tsunami is a very high, large wave in the ocean that is usually caused by an earthquake under the
sea and that can cause great destruction when it reaches land. It is a great sea wave produced
especially by submarine earth movement or volcanic eruption. The meaning is taken from Merriam-
Webster Learners’ Dictionary.

Twinning Concept – is a model that is operationally defined as the pairing and union of OCD
Regional Centers to address the multi-level operational coordination in disaster affected areas.
                                                         13


ACRONYMS
AFP – Armed Forces of the Philippines

BFP – Bureau of Fire Protection

CAS - Cluster Approach System

CCCM – Camp Coordination and Camp Management

CMCC – Civil Military Coordination Center

CHED - Commission on Higher Education

DA - Department of Agriculture

DBM - Department of Budget and Management

DepEd - Department of Education

DENR - Department of Environment and Natural Resources

DFA - Department of Foreign Affairs

DILG – Department of Interior and Local Government

DND – Department of National Defense

DOE - Department of Energy

DOH – Department of Health

DOLE - Department of Labor and Employment

DOST - Department of Science and Technology

DOT - Department of Tourism

DRRMC – Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

DRRM - Disaster Risk Reduction and Management

DOTC - Department of Transportation and Communications

DSWD – Department of Social Welfare and Development

DTI - Department of Trade and Industry

EOC – Emergency Operations Center
                                                                    14

ERP – Emergency Response Preparedness

ERIC – Emergency Response Integration Center

ETC – Emergency Telecommunications Cluster

FNI – Food and Non-Food Items

HADR – Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Response

IC – Incident Commander

ICP - Incident Command Post

ICS – Incident Command System

ICT – Information, Communication, Technology

IDP – Internally Displaced Person

IMT – Incident Management Team

IM-TWG – Information Management-Technical Working Group

LAO – Law and Order

LCE – Local Chief Executive

LDRRMC – Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

LGU – Local Government Unit

LOO – Line of Operations

MDM – Management of the Dead and Missing

MNCC – Multi-National Coordination Center

MDRRMC – Municipal Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

NDRP – National Disaster Response Plan

NDRRMC – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

NIMT – National Incident Management Team

OCD – Office of Civil Defense

OCDROs - Office of Civil Defense Regional Offices

OSS – One Stop Shop

PCG – Philippine Coast Guard
                                                                          15

PDRA-APP – Pre Disaster Risk Assessment – Action, Program, and Protocol

PDRRMC – Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

PDNA – Post Disaster Needs Assessment

PHIVOLCS - Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology

PIHAC – Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster

PNP – Philippine National Police

PRC – Philippine Red Cross

RDANA – Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis

RA – Republic Act

RC – Response Cluster

RDT – Rapid Deployment Team

RDRRMC – Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

RETT – Rapid Emergency Telecommunications Team

RO - Responsible Official

SRR – Search, Rescue, and Retrieval
                                                                                                             16


                                     CHAPTER II
       “The formula: Pre-Emptive +Force Evacuation=Zero Response Operations has
       become an effective derivative in achieving the nation’s intent of zero casualty in
       every disaster management operations.”
                                                  -Sec. Mel Senen Sarmiento, DILG

         This chapter provides facets of NDRP specific to Earthquake and Tsunami Incidents including
        earthquake-induced landslides. Chapter II stipulates when and how the NDRP is activated, the
         triggers for action, the alert and response levels, as well as the key players in the operations.



NDRP for EARTHQUAKE and TSUNAMI
What is NDRP?

As described earlier, the National Disaster Response Plan (NDRP) for Earthquake and Tsunami is
the Government of the Philippines’ hazard response plan. It devolves the earthquake and tsunami
related risks brought about by these hazards such as, ground shaking, ground rupture, liquefaction,
flooding, and earthquake-induced landslides. It outlines the concept, processes, and mechanisms to
facilitate a coordinated response from the national agencies down to local agencies.

As a national plan, it is strategic in nature and speaks of motherhood statements that provide
general direction (Strategic Plan). Strategic plans are stated in a general manner that is nonspecific
and less-detailed. Nevertheless, the strategic plan is able to direct people in the organization to
reflect general direction intended in the organization's operations. Higher-level managers develop
strategic plans. The major reason for this is the complexities involved in making plans designed to
meet the organization's broad-based goals.

                               While, the national government agencies, Response Clusters, and
                               regional agencies are required to prepare Operational Plans
                               (OPLANs). Operational plans give fine details on how tasks should be
                               carried out on a day-to-day basis. It have short-range objectives,
                               which they meet in one year or less.         Middle- and lower-level
                               managers develop operational plans. Operational planning is the
                               process of linking strategic goals and objectives to tactical goals and
                               objectives. It describes milestones, conditions for success and
                               explains how, or what portion of, a strategic plan will be put into
                               operation during a given operational period, in the case of
                               commercial application, a fiscal year or another given budgetary
                               term. An operational plan is the basis for, and justification of an
                               annual operating budget request.        Operational plans should be
                               prepared by the people who will be involved in implementation.
There is often a need for significant cross-departmental dialogue as plans created by one part of the
organization inevitably have implications for other parts.

On the other hand, local government institutions (provincial, city, and municipal) are responsible
for the development and continuous improvement of Contingency Plans (CONPLANs). In the
absence of Contingency Plans, Action Plans (APs) are used relative to the risk profiles of their
respective areas of responsibility and underlying risks. The CONPLANs and APs are hazard and/or
                                                                                                17

risk specific, area-focused, and time bound. Figure 3 depicts the development phases of DRRM
Plans from national level down to the local level.

To realize the country’s goal of having a safer, adaptive, and more resilient Filipino communities,
each of the four (4) Thematic Areas of Prevention/Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery
& Rehabilitation need to come up with a Strategic Plan, OPLAN, CONPLAN and AP from all its
national agencies down to the local government institutions.




       Figure 3.   Development Phases of DRRM Plans


Where is NDRP applicable?
Disasters come in various forms. As such, the National Disaster Risk Reduction Management
Council (NDRRMC) through its Response Pillar, headed by the Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD), together with the Office of Civil Defense (OCD) endeavors to prepare a
response plan for each possible and perceived disaster. At present, there are NDRPs for;

    a. Hydro-Meteorological Hazards;
    b. Earthquake and Tsunami; and
    c. Consequence Management for Terrorism-Related Incidents.

The NDRP through its Response Cluster and National IMT usually
operates at the Emergency Operations Centers (EOC) from national
down to provincial levels. The NDRRMC Operations Center located
at the Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City is the main
national EOC during disaster response operations. The NDRRMC
Operations Center (OpCen) is maintained by the OCD, and serves as
the main Command Center for all National Response Clusters. The
Operations Center houses the focal persons assigned by the
NDRRMC member agencies. These focal persons seating or ‘on-duty’
at the on-set of the disaster are responsible for comprehensive
coordination that needs tob be done to commence the operations of
                                                                                                  18

each Response Cluster. However, in the occurrence of a strong earthquake that may affect the
structure, the alternate on-site EOC of NDRRMC shall be transferred to the GHQ Grandstand Parade
Ground located at the Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City. Moreover, the alternate off-
site EOC of NDRRMC shall be establish at the Philippine Air Force, AFP compound in Clark Air Base,
Pampanga and/or at the facility of Subic Bay Freeport.

At the regional level, usually the OCD Regional Centers where converted into EOCs during disaster
response operations. However, in the event of a surge activity of the regions, big spaces such as
hotels’ activity areas, classrooms, and or similar areas are used for this purpose.

At the provincial level, the Provincial Capitol building usually operates as the EOC of the province.
While at the City and Municipal Level, the respective Municipal Hall becomes the EOCs of these
LGUs. Also, they are encouraged to look for the provisions of their respective Alternate EOCs as the
needs arise.

When is NDRP activated?

The NDRP is used by the Vice-Chairperson for Response as its reference and guide whenever a
hazard is detected. Figure 4 depicts the strategic concept of operations by the Response Cluster on
how it works.

In a sudden onset of disasters such as Earthquake and Tsunami setting, there are two (2) phases of
actions, DURING, and POST disasters. Immediately after the earthquake and/or in the event of
tsunamis caused by earthquake, the Response Cluster and NIMT through the NDRP may be
activated by virtue of:

    a. The instruction from the Vice-Chairperson for Response based from the official REPORTS
        from the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS) and/or an
        ADVISORY from the NDRRMC;
    b. PHIVOLCS provides a provision for an AUTOMATIC ACTIVATION to the Vice-Chairperson for
        Response;
          - if the earthquake is equal or greater than Magnitude 6.5 or Intensity VI; and
          - a tsunami alert is automatically raised if the earthquake is equal or greater than
            Magnitude 8.0
    c. REPORTS, including the results of Rapid Damage
         Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDNA) and requests
                                                                               When there is no
         from the Local Government Units (LGUs), or absence of
         reports from affected communities may be considered as             information coming
         basis for the activation of Response Cluster based from the            from and going
         NDRP.                                                              through the affected
                                                                               areas within 6-12
       During Disaster Phase or immediately after impact, the                     hours after
official REPORTS, including the results of Rapid Damage and                  earthquake and/or
Needs Assessment (RDNA) and requests from the Local                           tsunami. A Rapid
Government Unit (LGU), or absence of reports from affected
                                                                            Deployment Team/s
communities may be considered as basis for the activation of the
Response Cluster using the NDRP. Two scenarios will be used for             (RDT), NDRRMC will
the During Disaster Phase: 1) Augmentation and 2) Assumption of              be deployed on the
Response Activities.                                                            12th hour of no
                                                                            communication from
Augmentation of resources will commence at the “during disaster”             the affected areas.
phase. However, best practices dictate that even before the
                                                                                               19

disaster strikes, prepositioning of resources are implemented by Clusters concerned as part of the
preparedness activities. The results of the rapid damage assessment and needs analysis (RDANA)
on the ground by the affected LGU/s or Region/s shall be one of the bases for the request to the
NDRRMC for augmentation. Validation will be done by the respective Response Cluster Leads and
Members with their respective focal persons prior to the deployment of resources.

Assumption of response activities will commence based on identified trigger points:

    - Declaration of a State of Calamity;
    - Request for assistance from the Chairpersons, R/P/C/MDRRMC to the NDRRMC or its
      member agencies;
    - Request from a regional agency, the RDRRMC Chairperson present on the ground; and
    - As directed by the Chairperson, NDRRMC or the Executive Director, NDRRMC.

When there is no information coming from and going through the
affected areas within 6-12 hours after earthquake and/or tsunami. A
Rapid Deployment Team/s (RDT), NDRRMC will be deployed on the
12th hour of no communication from the affected areas. Upon
deployment, when it is safe, the RDT teams will conduct initial RDANA
and/or Aerial Survey in coordination with the Logistics Cluster. In the
event of a 7.2M earthquake in Metro Manila, two (2) rotary-wing
aircraft from the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be
automatically deployed for aerial survey. The objective of the aerial
survey is to determine the extent of the damages in the area and in
doing so, must determine the required and feasible number of and
strategic locations to install Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs).
Assessment should also determine initial number of resources needed
to sustain a 3-7 days of operations for relief and rescue operations. These EOCs must be
strategically located near available transport links either through air, land, and sea.

The RDT should also propose and prepare a site plan based from the contingency plans of the
affected LGUs for the installation of the following:

    -   Information and Communication Facilities for ETC
    -   Initial Response Operations Facilities for FNFI, CCM, and HEALTH Clusters
    -   Areas for the Supply and Storage Facilities for Logistics Cluster
    -   Emergency Power and Fuel Station
    -   Areas for Co-Location of Local and International Humanitarian Assistance Operation

All RDTs will prepare and submit Initial Aerial Survey Report to the Responsible Officer and/or
NDRRMC for immediate mobilization and deployment of resources and manpower which will
include the first wave of Law and Order Cluster contingent for peace and order among others. The
other RDT members will supervise the conduct of RDANA simultaneously with the Rapid Aerial
Survey capability. The NDRRMC upon receipt of the Rapid Aerial Survey Report from the RDT must
discuss and resolve the requirements from ground with the different NDRRMC agencies using the
Cluster Approach System and Incident Command System. Upon consultation, the NDRRMC through
the Vice-Chairperson for Response will give directions and instructions to all National Response
Clusters and NIMTs based on the report within 24 hours. The Response Clusters and IMTs are to
activate augmentation teams to replace the RDT Teams on ground after 7 days of operations.
                                                                                                20

Approval for the deployment of support resources for both approaches will be done through the
directive of the following:

    -   Cluster Leads;
    -   Vice-Chairperson for Response;
    -   Chairperson and/or Executive Director NDRRMC; and/or
    -   President of the Philippines

Continuous provision of warnings and alerts/messages from the warning agencies shall be given to
guide the operations and the safety of the Response Clusters and IMTs.

      In a Post-Disaster Scenario, the request for assistance from the
affected LGUs shall also become one of the bases for NDRP through the
Response Cluster and IMT deployment, or continuing response
operations. When the responders are safe to conduct operations, the
request for assistance from the affected LGUs for the Search, Rescue,
and Retrieval (SRR) operations and the mobilization of other national
response assets are being done for a sustainable response operations.
This phase is defined as the period where the NDRRMC through the
Vice-Chairperson for Response (DSWD) will declare the end/waning
strong earthquake and/or tsunami hampering response activities. This
will involve the start of the Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA).
Each Response Cluster will conduct their respective post response
operation evaluation to document the lessons learned and best
practices. These evaluation reports will be submitted to the NDRRMC
for policy improvement and organizational development as well as this document, NDRP. The
details of the evaluation will be determined by the respective Response Cluster Leads in
collaboration with its Member Clusters.

     Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) shall be conducted upon declaration of transition to
Post Disaster Phase by the Chairperson of the NDRRMC, the Executive Director of the NDRRMC
and/or the Vice-Chairperson (Response) of the NDRRMC. The NDRRMC through the OCD will
organize PDNA Teams that will prepare all necessary documents and available data to facilitate a
speedy assessment in accordance with guidelines issued by the NDRRMC. Figure 4 represents the
strategic concepts of operations for earthquake and tsunamis that clearly depicts the activation of
the Response Cluster through the NDRP.
                                                                                                          21




        Figure 4. Strategic Concept of Operations for Earthquake and Tsunamis with Activation Triggers.

The Concept of Operations, Agency Membership, Roles and Responsibilities, and Operational
Workflow of these Response Clusters are stipulated in their respective Operations Protocol. (see
Annex).

The participation of the International Humanitarian Community is requested through the issuance
of the Request for International Humanitarian Assistance (RFIHA) by the Government of the
Philippines with the approval of the President through the NDRRMC, and facilitated by the
Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster (PIHAC). The same Cluster facilitates all
requests from various clusters and offers from responding nations or international organizations.

Triggers for Activation

As mentioned earlier, any one (1) of the following may trigger the use of NDRP through the
activation of the Response Cluster and NIMT:

   a. The instruction from the Vice-Chairperson for Response based from the official REPORTS
      from the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS) and/or an
      ADVISORY from the NDRRMC;
   b. PHIVOLCS provides a provision for an AUTOMATIC ACTIVATION to the Vice-Chairperson
      for Response;
          - if the earthquake is equal or greater than Magnitude 6.5 or Intensity VI; and
          - if the earthquake and tsunami is equal or greater than Magnitude 8.0
   c. Red Alert Status and Level 2 Response Action;
   d. Result of RDANA; and
   a. As directed by the Chairperson, NDRRMC or Executive Director, NDRRMC.
                                                                                               22

                                The National Response Cluster is being activated by the Vice-
                                Chairperson for Response, DSWD while the National IMT is being
                                activated by the Executive Director, NDRRMC as necessary.

                                At the Regional Level, the Regional Response Cluster is being
                                activated by the Vice-Chairperson for Response, DSWD while the
                                Regional IMT is being activated by the Chairperson, RDRRMC as
                                necessary.

                                At the Provincial Level, the Provincial Response Cluster
                                counterparts and Provincial IMT is being activated by the governor
                                as the Chairperson, PDRRMC and Responsible Officer respectively.

                           While at the City and Municipal Level, Response Cluster
                           counterparts and the IMT is being activated by the mayor as the
Chairperson, C/MDRRMC and Responsible Officer respectively.

Alert Levels
Alert level may or may not trigger the activation of the National Response Cluster and NIMT based
from the NDRP. It is raised according to the level of readiness to take on an activity or response
mission. It is to be raised prudently to provide enough time to those concerned to prepare without
burdening undue stress.

At the national level, the approved NDRRMC Operations Center SOP provides the clear indicators of
alert level. Alert Levels are defined in a three (3) step color code: WHITE, BLUE, and RED as
depicted in Figure 5.




Figure 5. Alert Levels with Indicators and Response Level utilize by the Response Cluster
                                                                                                 23


 WHITE: Refers to regular or normal operations, monitoring and reporting;

 BLUE: Pertains to a condition of stand-by readiness in preparation for a full scale response
  operation. This is commonly done in situations of slow-onset disasters. In this condition, at
  least 50% of human and material resources are made available for duty or deployment. The
  detection, tracking, monitoring, and result of pre-disaster risk assessment triggers this status;
  and

 RED: Signifies the highest level of readiness in anticipation of an imminent emergency situation,
  or in response to a sudden onset of disaster. In this condition, all human and material resources
  are made available for duty and deployment. This may result to the activation of the Response
  Cluster and NIMT including the escalation of the highest level of response. As such, inter-cluster
  action planning is done during this status.

Response Levels
Activation of response operations must be calibrated prudently to uphold timely and effective
response while, at the same time utilizing efficiently material and human resources. Levels of
Response are categorized in three (3) levels: AGENCY, SPECIFIC CLUSTER, and INTER-CLUSTER. The
Levels of Response used as basis of the Response Cluster and Incident Management Teams is
illustrated in Figure 6 below.




       Figure 6. Level of Disaster Response Actions
                                                                                                    24

AGENCY RESPONSE pertains to situations where response mobilizations are carried out within the
bounds of a concerned agency only. This is Level 1 Response.

CLUSTER RESPONSE refers to situations that require inter-agency response within a concerned
Response Cluster. This is Level 2 Response.

INTER-CLUSTER RESPONSE is a situation that calls for inter-cluster response. This may entail
either a group of Response Clusters or the entire Response Pillar. This is Level 3 Response.

Who are the Key Players?

This section of the NDRP identifies and describes the different stakeholders who have significant
interest, influences, and roles in the implementation of this plan. The analysis also presents their
respective issues and concerns in the realization of this strategic plan. Shown in Table 1 to Table 3
are the summaries of disaster response management stakeholders’ relative to NDRP operations.

                               The tables will show us the two important key elements of the human
                               resources of NDRP for earthquake and tsunami; the internal
                               stakeholders with principal and secondary stakeholders and the
                               external stakeholders.

                               As shown in Table 1 and 2, the NDRRMC will be the main proponent,
                               while the Response Pillar through the Vice-Chairperson for Response
                               is the lead agency in the implementation of this plan. The NDRRMC,
                               as the main agency tasked to respond and manage all disaster
                               operations has the ultimate responsibility for any decision and action
                               affecting the difference between saving and losing more lives in the
                               aftermath of any disaster. Thus the responsibility of orchestrating a
                               national response either for augmentation or assumption of disaster
                               response activities require educated decisions and actions, based on
                               sound data and analyses.        To pursue this, all members of the
                               NDRRMC and those that will be assigned to be a part of the NDRRMC
                               will be oriented to the tenets of this plan and the systems installed in
                               support of this plan. The NDRRMC as a collegiate body and through
the leadership of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons or the Executive Director (upon the
instruction of the Chairperson) will take the helm of the operations and will provide all decisions
and instructions for a timely and appropriate assistance to the affected population.

The Emergency Response Preparedness (ERP) Core Group which is composed of the Executive
Director of NDRRMC and the four (4) pillars of Prevention and Mitigation, Preparedness, Response
and Recovery & Rehabilitation provide risk analysis and constant monitoring of the incident.
These actions are supported by the Technical Specialist Group from PHIVOLCS and MGB that
render scientific information and converting it into knowledge management related to either
earthquake or tsunami. All output data, information, and knowledge are being used by the
Response Cluster Lead Agencies and Members including the National IMT to their minimum and
advance response action planning leading to the implementing and action plan for response.
                                                                                                25




       Table 1. The internal principal stakeholders of the NDRP



In this NDRP, there are designated assisting regions assigned to provide response operations
assistance to their respective quadrants. To create an effective and efficient response atmosphere,
an accurate coordinating mechanisms and actions are imperative to produce a good working
relationships among key players.

In the event of a 7.2 M earthquake with Intensity 8 in Metro Manila, the assignment per Assisting
Regional DRRMCs are the following:

      North Quadrant located at the Veterans Golf Course, North Ave., Quezon City
          - RDRRMC I as the Primary Assisting Region
          - RDRRMC VII as the Alternate Assisting Region

      South Quadrant located at the Villamor Air Base Golf Course, Pasay City
          - RDRRMC V as the Primary Assisting Region
          - RDRRMC VI as the Alternate Assisting Region

      West Quadrant located at the Intramuros Golf Course, City of Manila
          - RDRRMC of CAR as the Primary Assisting Region
          - RDRRMC X as the Alternate Assisting Region

      East Quadrant at the Wack-Wack Golf Course in Mandaluyong City
          - RDRRMC II as the Primary Assisting Region
          - RDRRMC XI as the Alternate Assisting Region
                                                                                                  26




                                                              Formulate new
                                                              law, policy and
                                                              budget




       Table 2. The internal secondary stakeholders of NDRP

In the supporting but equally carrying important roles are the different leaders of national
government agencies, the public, private, and volunteer groups including the policy-makers that
have always an essential point of presence in the national, regional, and provincial levels. These
internal stakeholders will provide effective and efficient disaster response management operation
platforms and systems, an organized structure of NDRP, and the formulation of new laws and
regulations related to the sphere of response operations.

In Table 3, shown is the significant external stakeholders that will complement in the success of the
implementation of the NDRP. It is important to note that the IHC, Foreign Militaries, and Public,
Private, including Volunteer Organizations have almost similar roles to play – as donors and
responders. While the media and telecommunications companies have their distinct responsibility
to perform, that is; as information providers, reporters and communicators respectively, their
issues and concerns are directed to the domain of NDRRMC through the Response Cluster and IMT.
The Filipino people, as the actual beneficiaries of NDRP, must experience the appropriate
preparedness and prompt response services from the government. They also need accurate
information for early warning, preparedness actions of the government and local officials, response
activities, and recovery and rehabilitation programs, plans, and actions.
                                                                                                   27




       Table 3. The significant external stakeholders of NDRP

Therefore, on the wider scope, we may say that the broad national security and disaster response
management challenges in a strategic environment presents not purely governmental and military
problem, but rather all are national problems requiring the full application of all the instruments of
our national power – the fostering of the spirit of “Bayanihan” in the concept of jointness of all
stakeholders.

How NDRP works?
The NDRP consists of triggers for action, actions by, and outputs of key players that progress across
operational period between Emergency Response and Recovery & Rehabilitation. It uses the
disaster response management operational spectrum as its guiding determinant in the attainment
of its end-goal of an effective and efficient response operations.

The disaster response management operational spectrum discusses the whole dimension of the
activities of the Response Cluster and Incident Management Teams as the two (2) main operational
components of the NDRRMC during emergencies as shown in Figure 7. The entire breadth of
response operations are canopied by the different bridging mechanisms of Cluster Approach
System, Incident Command System, Humanitarian Civil-Military Coordination System, and the Co-
Location Strategy.

It is composed of two (2) key mission-essential activities; the Response Cluster and Incident
Management Teams Activities and the Response Cluster and Incident Management Team
Deactivation.
                                                                                                  28




   Figure 7. Dimension of Disaster Response Management Operational Spectrum



Response Cluster (RC) and Incident Management Team (IMT) Activities
                         The RC and IMT are the two (2) main operating arm of the Response Pillar.
                         Its’ activities start with its official activation through a Memorandum
                         Order approved and signed by the Vice-Chairperson for Response and the
                         Executive Director, NDRRMC respectively. Its activations are based from
                         the triggers of actions mentioned in earlier Chapter. Activities within this
                         phase includes response operations of RC as the “force provider” and IMT
                         as the “force employer”, and Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs
                         Analysis (RDANA) including the minimum and advance response planning
                         actions of the different Response Cluster Leads and members.




Response Cluster (RC) and Incident Management Team (IMT)
Demobilization and Deactivation
In this activities, the demobilization and deactivation of RC and IMT at the
national level starts when early recovery phase is being observed. Return
to normalcy is an indicator of early recovery and a signal of hand-over
from Emergency Response to Recovery and Rehabilitation Phase. This is
further gauged by decreasing requests for assistance by the affected
community, governance of Local Chief Executive has gone back to normal,
power and communication and other basic services are beginning to be
restored, and economic activities have resumed. Moreover, as mentioned
before, these actions are further manifested when there is diminishing
number of evacuees, decreasing number of search and rescue assistance.
Normalcy is noticeable when markets, banks, stores, gasoline stations are
                                                                                                     29

starting to function. After the hand-over to Recovery and Rehabilitation Pillar, NDRP will then be
deactivated and Response Operations (RC and IMT) shall be demobilized.

Aside from these two (2) key mission-essential activities, there are two (2) critical decision point of
these activities that signifies the start and/or indicators of each, these are:

     a. Disaster Operations that includes the following strokes:
            - Sudden Onset;
            - Detection and Monitoring;
            - Response Cluster and IMT Activation; and
            - Triggers of Action

     b. Early Recovery that includes some indicators for transition:
            - Increasing level of LCEs governance;
            - Diminishing numbers of evacuees;
            - Decreasing numbers of SAR operations; and
            - Going back to normalcy and manifestation of business continuity

Transition Point
In earthquake and tsunami setting, the transition between Response and Recovery & Rehabilitation
Phase is what we called Early Recovery (ER). According to the IRR of RA 10121, “Early Recovery”
is a multidimensional process of recovery that begins in a humanitarian setting. It is guided by
development principles that seek to build on humanitarian programs and catalyze sustainable
development opportunities. It aims to generate self-sustaining, nationally-owned, resilient
processes for post-crisis recovery. It encompasses the restoration of basic services, livelihoods,
shelter, governance, security and rule of law, environment and social dimensions, including
reintegration of displaced populations.

Taking into consideration the definition in the IRR mentioned above and the definition of
“Recovery” described in the Section 3 of the RA 10121, it is deemed that most of the activities of
Early Recovery are comprised in the Phase of Rehabilitation and Recovery.

On the other hand, according to the NDRRMP, the implementation of temporary livelihood and/or
income generating activities is a part of response activities (Outcome 19: Coordinated, Integrated
System for Early Recovery implemented on the national and local levels).

The Early Recovery shall be undertaken in each Response Cluster respectively and should subject
to the concurrence of the NDRRMC and/or RDRRMC based on the results of RDANA. This does not
include the activities that will be identified for Rehabilitation and Reconstruction after any disaster.
All Response Clusters will pursue their respective early recovery activities that will be required in
the affected areas they are involved in and will only be terminated upon determination of the
Cluster Lead.

In this phase, the Vice-Chairperson for Recovery and Rehabilitation Thematic Area officially sets-off
utilizing its own CLUSTER.
                                                                                                   30


                                        CHAPTER III
            “We can't solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we
            used when we created them.”
                                                     -Albert Einstein

  This chapter discusses the bridging mechanisms among actors and agencies. These are developed
  in the recent years and have positively proven to enhance coordination and efficiency in the
  response operations.


NDRP BRIDGING AND COORDINATING MECHANISMS
Philippine Response Cluster System
The cluster system is the aggregation of responding government
agencies, humanitarian organizations, faith-based organizations,             There are three (3)
private and civil society organizations, including volunteers                  most important
according to their specific line of services or expertise during                 values of the
emergency response. It defines the roles and responsibilities of             Cluster-Approach
each cluster towards a more systematic delivery of response and              System, these are;
services. There are three (3) most important values of the                        leadership,
Cluster-Approach System, these are; leadership, predictability,              predictability, and
and accountability. Under the system, government agencies are                   accountability.
organized into clusters that work together towards agreed                    Under the system,
common humanitarian objectives.                                                  government
                                                                                 agencies are
The cluster approach was first adopted by the Philippine                        organized into
Government in 2007 through the NDCC Memorandum Circular                      clusters that work
No.5.   In August 2008, then NDCC used the Response Cluster                   together towards
System to address the concerns of IDP in Mindanao. In the                      agreed common
aftermath of Typhoon Ondoy, (with international name                             humanitarian
Ketsana)in 2009, the government requested for international                       objectives.
humanitarian assistance utilizing the Response Cluster System.
Continuing refinement in the clustering of agencies happened in
the succeeding years, the Response Cluster System was used in various disaster response
operations across the country such as Typhoon Pablo, Bohol Earthquake, Zamboanga Siege,
Typhoon Ruby, and Typhoon Lawin. Livelihood was taken out from the Response Cluster (RC)
because it was deemed fit to be included in the Recovery and Rehabilitation Phase.

Currently, the Philippine Government recognizes the following eleven (11) Emergency Response
Clusters, and their respective lead agencies:

  SRR : Search Rescue and Retrieval (AFP)
  HEALTH: with Sub-Clusters on: Medical and Public Health Services, Water-Sanitation-Hygiene
   (WASH), Mental Health and Psycho-Social Support Services (MHPSS), and Nutrition (DOH)
  IDPP: Internally Displaced Persons Protection (DSWD)
  CCCM: Camp Coordination and Camp Management (DSWD)
  FNFI: Food and Non-Food Items (DSWD)
                                                                                              31

  LOG: Logistics with Sub-Clusters on: Warehousing, Transportation, & Services (OCD)
  LAO: Law and Order (PNP)
  ET: Emergency Telecommunications (OCD)
  EDU: Education (DepEd)
   PIHA: Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance (DFA)
   MDM: Management of the Dead and Missing (DILG)


Incident Command System (ICS)
It is a standard, on-scene, all-hazard incident management
concept that can be used by all DRRMC member agencies and
response groups. The purpose of the ICS is to help to ensure:

       Safety of responders
       Achievement of tactical objectives
       Efficient use of resources

As a management system, it meets the needs of incidents of any
kind or size. It allows personnel from a variety of agencies to
meld rapidly into a common management structure using plain
language. It maximizes effective logistical and administrative support to operational staff by
avoiding duplication of efforts and providing accountability and a planning process.


Legal Basis of Incident Command System
   Republic Act 10121
      Section 9 (g): The Office of Civil Defense (OCD) shall formulate standard operating
       procedures for coordination…
      Rule 7 (h), Implementing Rules and Regulations: The OCD shall establish ICS as part of the
       Philippines’ on- scene disaster response system.

  NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 4, s2012
    Signed on March 28, 2012, this provides the implementing guidelines on the use of the
    ICS under the Philippine DRRM System.

  Executive Order No. 82, s2012
     Signed on September 4, 2012, this mandates the activation of the ICS for human-
     induced crises.

  NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 43, s2016
    Signed on August 18, 2016, this provides the guidelines on the interoperability of the
    Incident Management Teams and Response Clusters.

  NDRRMC Memorandum Order No. 44, s2016
    Also signed on August 18, 2016, this provides the guidelines on the mobilization of Incident
    Management Teams

  NDRRMC-NSC Joint Memorandum Circular No. 1, s2016
                                                                                                32

     Approved on 30 August 2016, this JMC requires the use of ICS as an integral component of
     contingency plan for both natural and human-induced hazards.

Incident Management Team (IMT)

The organization of the IMT is composed of the Incident Commander and appropriate Command
and General Staff assigned to an incident or planned event as shown in Figure 8 below.




       Figure 8. Basic Organization of IMT




Incident Commander (IC): The individual responsible for all incident activities, including the
development of strategies and tactics and the ordering and the release of resources. The IC has
overall authority and responsibility for conducting incident operations and is responsible for the
management of all incident operations at the incident site. The IC receives directive from the
Responsible Official who is the overall in charge of an agency, organization or institution who has
the full authority for making decisions and providing directions to manage an incident or planned
event within his/her jurisdiction.

Command Staff: the Command Staff typically includes a Public Information Officer (PIO), a Safety
Officer, and a Liaison Officer, who report directly to the IC and may have assistants as necessary.

General Staff: a group of incident management personnel organized according to function and
reporting to the Incident Commander. The General Staff typically consists of the Operations,
Planning, Logistics, and Finance/Administration Section Chiefs.




CF Annex I
                                                                                                 33

Inter-Operability of Response Cluster and IMT
The Response Clusters acts as the resource provider, and the IMT
acts as the resource employer, and is linked by the DRRMC-EOC.
The RO and the principals from other agencies undertake
coordination by:

 •   Making policy decisions;
 •   Establishing priorities;
 •   Resolving critical resource issues;
 •   Mobilizing and tracking resources; and
 •   Collecting, analyzing, and disseminating situation
        report/information

As shown in Figure 9, the Response Cluster provides resources to
the Incident Management Team following the check-in procedure
under the Resource Unit of the Planning Section. These resources
shall be placed under the Operational Control of the IMT, but
remains to be under the Administrative Control of the RC Teams.

At the tactical level on the ground, RC Teams with their respective resources shall operate as units
under the Operations and Plans Sections. The RC Teams shall abide by the principles of the ICS
upon check-in, while performing their specific mandates, SOPs and technical expertise. The IMT will
manage them tactically for proper placement and efficiency.




       Figure 9. The strategic interoperability of Response Cluster and IMT
                                                                                                     34

Co-Location Strategy
With the lessons learned and immense challenges identified, various humanitarian partners and
key players of disaster risk reduction and management, both local and international, came together
to plan, execute, and evaluate the coordination mechanisms for disaster relief operations. These
actions reviewed the existing humanitarian civil-military coordination mechanisms in the country.
Moreover, it evaluated the usefulness of the current global, regional, and in-country guidelines in
supporting humanitarian priorities in the hardest-hit areas and in supporting national and local
authorities.

The civil-military coordination that was set up in Roxas City during the disaster response
management operations that followed in the wake of Super Typhoon YOLANDA is worth
remembering. The interaction between the government, humanitarian actors, and the foreign
military forces was cited as an effective model of humanitarian civil-military coordination.

The purpose of co-locating humanitarian civil-military actors is to ensure faster communication,
coordination, cooperation, collaboration, and to guarantee commitment (5cs). It will also envision
attaining effective operational planning, efficient task division, and comprehensive information
sharing.

The specific objectives of the co-location strategy for humanitarian civil-military coordination are
as follows, to:

   a. Recognize priorities based on humanitarian needs through transparent sharing of
      information;
   b. Build up humanitarian civil-military coordination effectiveness and efficiency;
   c. Develop measureable and common understanding for operational planning;
   d. Ensure rapid coordination, cooperation, and decision-making based on needs;
   e. Maximize communication and the sharing of information to all stakeholders, actors, and key
      players from the national and local government levels, the foreign and local NGOs, and
      Foreign and Local Military Units; and
   f. Optimize the utilization of unique resources (i.e. military aircraft) in order to develop
      sustainment concept in disaster management operations.

The co-location of local and international humanitarian organizations, military forces, and the
domestic disaster management authority improves the establishment of a common situational
picture, facilitates unity of efforts, and allows the pooling of resources for the affected areas during
disaster management operations. The use of various bridging mechanisms such as the Cluster
System, Incident Command System (ICS), and other methods provide overarching actions that cuts
across the different levels of command.
                                                                                                    35


Coordination with the Militaries – Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)
During disaster response operations, the Armed Forces have available units with wide span of
expertise and enormous resources ready for deployment.
In the Philippines, the Armed Forces is mandated by the
National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
under Republic Act 10121 to act as the Lead Agency for
Search, Rescue & Retrieval (SRR) Cluster and as a
significant member of Logistics (LOG), Law and Order
(LAO), Emergency Telecommunications (ET), Health, and
Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Clusters
(PIHAC) and AFP focal person to the following Response
Clusters:

  Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations Opns, J3 – LAO
   Cluster
  Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics, J4 – Logistics Cluster
  Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans and Programs, J5 –
   PIHAC (MNCC)
  Deputy Chief of Staff for C4S, J6 – Emergency
   Telecommunications Cluster
  Deputy Chief of Staff for CMO, J7 – PIHAC (CMCC)
  Office of the Surgeon General (OTSG) / Office of the Chief Nurse (OTCN) / Office of the Chief
   Dental (OTCD) – Health Cluster

Upon approval of the President of the Philippines of the request for International Humanitarian
Assistance through the recommendation of the Chairperson of the NDRRMC, the AFP acts as the
conduit of Foreign Militaries and shall establish close coordination with the NDRRMC through the
PIHAC. To better maximize the capabilities and services of foreign militaries, the following
coordination mechanisms have been created over the years and continuously being enhanced in
every HADR operations:

Civil-Military Coordination (CMCoord)
The CMCoord is an essential dialogue and interaction between civilian and military actors in
humanitarian emergencies necessary to protect and promote humanitarian principles, avoid
competition, minimize inconsistency, and pursue common goals.

It is a framework that enhances a broad understanding of humanitarian action and guides political
and military actors on how best to support that action. It helps develop specific policy based on
internationally agreed guidelines, and it establishes humanitarian civil-military coordination
structures. The MNCC and CMCC support NDRRMC HADR Operations through CMCoord.

Multi-National Coordination Center (MNCC)
It is a military to military coordination mechanism. The AFP through the Assistant Deputy Chief of
Staff for Plans, AJ5 shall take the lead in coordinating collective efforts. An MNCC is a multinational
coordination center that facilitates coordination and cooperation of foreign military forces with the
Armed Forces of the Philippines to support humanitarian assistance and disaster relief (HADR)
missions. The Philippine Government determines the priorities for support and articulates those
priorities to the MNCC for support. The MNCC does not exercise command over forces; rather, it
                                                                                                    36

provides a process and a conduit for multinational coordination and planning to facilitate selection,
coordination, and integration of effort among the participating nations’ militaries for effective
mission accomplishment.

Civilian-Military Coordination Center (CMCC)
It is a civilian to military coordination mechanism. The AFP through the Assistant Deputy Chief of
Staff for Civil Military Operations, AJ7 shall take the lead in coordinating collective efforts. The
CMCC will provide liaising and coordination between the AFP capabilities and other agencies both
local and foreign organizations during HADR Operations.

Coordination with International Humanitarian Communities
One of the key players during disaster response operations in the Philippines is the International
Humanitarian Community. In coordination with the government, this group supports humanitarian
operations, participates in major relief actions, and engages with the government’s disaster risk
reduction and management council.

Based from the ASEAN Joint Disaster Response Plan, to date, there are three coordinating bodies
working in ASEAN region that receives the mandates from the Member States in coordinating the
humanitarian response. These are the AHA Centre, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA), and the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. The
collaboration of these agencies is playing a key role in
coordinating international humanitarian assistance to
support the disaster-affected Member State. However, it is
imperative to have a sense of understanding of the national
systems on disaster response operations of member states in
need.

In the coordination with the Assisting ASEAN Member States,
the SASOP guides the actions of ASEAN Member States and
the AHA Centre in coordinating joint disaster relief and
emergency response operations. Within the SASOP, there are
procedures and forms to be used for the assisting entity to
offer and/or render assistance to a receiving or a requesting
Party (ASEAN Member State) in cases of a disaster
emergency.

UN OCHA plays a critical role in coordinating international
humanitarian assistance. UN OCHA provides support at the
regional and country level to coordinate humanitarian action,
advocate for the rights of people in need, develop humanitarian policy and analysis, manage
humanitarian information systems and oversees humanitarian pooled funds (UN OCHA, 2014).

In the NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami Version 1, mobilization of resources will happen in all
phases of the disaster under the directive and coordination of the different Response Clusters.
Resources initially will come either from the different national and local government agencies, UN
organizations, and countries with Philippine bilateral agreements and from international
organizations. Resources are ‘things” (either living or non-living) that are needed in the provision of
assistance to those affected by a disaster.
                                                                                                     37

In the case where there is no call for “international humanitarian assistance” from the President, only
those resources available within the country will be mobilized and provided by the international
organizations and NGOs to the affected areas.

All humanitarian assistance coming from the international organizations or local civil society
organizations (CSOs) are required to coordinate their activities and requirements with the NDRRMC.
In cases where national government assets are to be utilized like transport vehicles for the delivery of
food and non-food items, these International NGOs and CSOs shall coordinate with the NDRRMC. This
will assist the NDRRMC in managing the overall national government operations for response but as a
matter of policy, all available government assets shall prioritize requests coming from the Response
Clusters. This was based from the NDRP for HydroMet v.1, Chapter 2.3.4.4, para II, p.19

The assistance coming from the international humanitarian community will be coordinated by the
NDRRMC through the Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance (PIHAC) Cluster.

The PIHAC shall require the Philippine Response Clusters to submit an itemized list of possible
humanitarian civil-military assistance requirements, i.e., donations in kind, foreign medical teams,
search and rescue teams, among others. This information will be collated and conveyed to foreign
embassies, UN and international organizations in the form of an advisory. This will also guide the
international community on the Philippines' post disaster needs requirement.

To establish and sustain an efficient and effective coordination of all international assistance, the
NDRRMC through the Vice-Chairperson for Response assisted by the activated Response Clusters
will pursue in its operations the following:

   1. Establishment of a humanitarian civil-military coordination mechanism at the national
      level. This will guide all assistance (civil, military, and humanitarian) that will be provided
      from local and international organizations;
   2. Adopt a co-location strategy (as appropriate) for humanitarian civil-military coordination.
      This strategy will expedite an organized and seamless flow of operations on ground; and
   3. Establish a simple transparent tracking system. This will be pursued with the assistance of
      the PIHA Cluster Lead and member agencies.
                                                                                                      38


                                        CHAPTER IV
             “In the world of disaster response operations, we need to deliver appropriate
             and prompt response, anytime, anywhere, anyhow. To be able to do this, treat
             the possible victims as kings and queens … think of them as your own father,
             mother, sister, brother, your children … your own loved ones.”

                                                         -LtC Edwin C. Sadang, GSC (SC)


  This chapter presents the activities, tools, and services developed over the recent years and are
  found to be helpful enhancement of emergency response operations.




ACTIVITIES, COMMON TOOLS AND SERVICES
Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA)
RDANA is a disaster response tool that is used immediately during the early and critical state of a
disaster as soon as the conditions allow disaster survey teams to operate. It aims to determine the
immediate relief and response requirements and is dependent upon the type of disaster. It is broad
in scope and focuses on overall patterns and trends. It identifies the magnitude of a disaster
(without necessarily delivering exact figures) by focusing on the
general impact on the society and the people's capacity to cope.
The tools to be used for its operations are Form No. 1 that requires
visual and initial reports of damage and needs and the Form No. 2
that requires a more detailed damage assessment and needs
analysis that serves as the initial baseline data for Post Disaster
Needs Assessment (PDNA). RDANA is composed of the following:

  a. Damage Assessment - this depicts the overall picture of the
     incident situation by providing a "snapshot" of the disaster's
     magnitude and impact on population and infrastructure. It
     answers the question "what has happened?"

  b. Needs Analysis - this defines the level and type of immediate
     assistance required for the affected population. It answers
     the question "what needs to be done?"

RDANA comprises situation, resource, and needs analysis in the
early and critical stage of a disaster and is intended to determine the type of immediate response
and relief needed and appropriate follow-on actions. The assessment provides information about
the needs, possible intervention strategies and resource requirements, and aims to identify the
following:

   a. General overview of the damage in terms of:
      - nature of a disaster;
      - extent of damage and the secondary threats;
      - impact to availability of resources and local response capacity; and
      - the level of continuing or emerging threats
                                                                                             39

   b. Assessment of the situation and recommendation on the following:
      - most urgent relief needs;
      - potential methods for delivery or priorities for action;
      - utilization of resources for immediate response;
      - options for relief assistance;
      - need for detailed assessment of specific geographical areas or sectors; and
      - need for international assistance



Legal Bases and References
   a. Section 9, Powers and Functions of OCD under RA 10121: Formulate standard
      operating procedures for the deployment of rapid assessment teams, information sharing
      among different government agencies, and coordination before and after disasters at all
      levels;

   b. Section 3, Rule 4 IRR of RA 10121: The RDRRMC Chairperson may tap the facilities and
      resources of other government agencies and private sectors, for the protection of life and
      properties in pursuit of disaster risk reduction and management; and

   c. NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 25, s. 2014, Subject: Guidelines in the
      Conduct of Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA)

Common and Fundamental Operational Datasets (CAFOD) and
Information Management Technical Working Group (IMTWG)
Having a common operating picture among decision makers,
responders, and affected population is a categorical imperative
in any disaster response operations. It is founded on having a
common knowledge and understanding of objects, called
Common Operational Dataset (COD), and its attributes
(Fundamental Operational Dataset).

  Common Operational Dataset (COD) is the object, like a
   municipal hall, school, church, or hospital; and
  Fundamental Operational Dataset (FOD) is the attribute
   of the object, like in the case of the hospital: services or
   specializations offered number of beds, doctors, and nurses.

Legal Basis
Having appreciated the value of such common baseline data, the Chairperson of NDRRMC issued
Memorandum Circular No. 1, s. 2016, creating the Information Management- Technical Working
Group (IM-TWG) to facilitate the QUALITY, ACCESSIBILITY, and INTER-OPERABILITY of various
datasets of different agencies involved in DRRM.

On 20 October 2016, Memorandum Circular No. 66, s. 2016 was issued for all NDRRMC TMG
Member Agencies, other governmental, and partner agencies including all institutions in the
country directing them of the following instructions;
                                                                                                     40

 a. Implement the guidelines, standards, protocols, and templates developed and agreed upon by
     the IM-TWG. This is to ensure data compatibility and system interoperability across all
     emergency cycle, sectors, and levels;
 b. Provide access to your respective CODs and FODs in compliance with agreed templates; and
 c. Use the following CODs and FODs for reporting and monitoring during any forthcoming
     disaster events:
       - The indicative Philippine Standard Geographic Code (PSGC) as the official registry for
          administrative divisions in the country;
       - The indicative barangay boundary layer prepared by the IM-TWG based on the barangay
          layer developed by PSA in the context of the 2015 Population census; and
       - Any other CODs and FODs that will have been cleared by the IM-TWG and made available
          for download to the nominated IM-TWG contact focal persons.




     Figure 11. Framework of the IM-TWG activities, structure and expected outputs

Following the structure in Figure 11, the IMTWG acts as the umbrella and technical advisory body
for the implementation of any data and information management project, as well as a facilitator
information system interoperability projects. As such, it serves as a building block for establishing an
Emergency Management Information System (EMIS).
As a facilitator, the IMTWG does not collect, nor keep data or information physically. Rather it
ascertains that data curated by member agencies are of quality (updated, catalogued, etc),
Accessible to all stakeholders (standing permisions for quick access during emergencies), and
Inter-operable to one another (use of common key).

All data remains in the holdings and safe-keeping of each agency. Only the sets of data needed in a
given operation is accessed and shared to the network as part of the common operating picture.

In each of the operation, new data and information are added into the existing sets. These updates
are fed back into the curator-agency to enrich and nourish their library and upgrade the collective
capacity of the NDRRMC and the country. This vision is best illustrated in Figure 12 below.
                                                                                                  41




     Figure 12. The vision of the IM-TWG including COD and FOD framework




Response Cluster’s Information Management System
Data and Information is the life line of any operation. The Response Cluster Information
Management System (RCIMS) is an ecosystem that gathers and categorizes bits and pieces of data
coming from all possible sources during Response Operations and transforms them into actionable
information for the use of DRRM Managers, decision makers, response operatives, potential
volunteers and donors, as well as the affected population themselves.

RCIMS, as of this writing, consists of three platforms, the INCIDENT MONITORING SYSTEM (IMS),
the SITREP System (SRS), and the collaboration website called ResponseOps.PH.

                            The INCIDENT MONITORING SYSTEM (IMS) is an on-line ticketing
                            system that tags every single call (request for help, complaint, inquiry,
                            etc) received by the Response Cluster Operations Center. These calls
                            are documented and routed to concerned Cluster Leads who then
                            mobilizes specific agency or organization for appropriate response.
Such response action is feedback to the original caller to ensure the incident is attended to by the
bayanihan efforts of government, uniformed service, private groups, NGOs, faith-based groups, and
individual vounteers who care about their well-being. The famous mantra in IMS is “leave no caller
behind.” (www.info-aid.net/ims)

The incidents gathered in IMS together with the needs assessment, actions taken, and gaps analyses
by the responding organizations are logged into the Situation Report System (SRS). It is an online
system that records analyses and actions by each responding agency and groups them into
respective Response Cluster for a systematic and effective response. The SitRep is collated by the
                                                                                                    42

Response Cluster Secretariat according to specific periods and presented regularly to the Response
Cluster Monitoring Meetings and NDRRMC Operations Center. (www.info-aid.net/sitrep)

All the data and information gathered in the course of operations, including the official advisories of
the Philippine Government through the concerned agencies are published in the online
collaboration platform that is named ResponseOps.PH. It serves as an electronic bulletin board for
the official information of the Response Operations. It includes all Situation Reports, Operational
Maps, reported needs and actions taken by various agencies and organizations. It also serves as a
platform for advance coordination between international organizations or foreign governments
and the Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Center (PIHAC) to know the situation on
the ground and the assistance officially requested by the Philippine Government. It can be accessed
by logging to www.ResponseOps.Ph.

While the RCIMS is an online platform that runs through constant internet and power outside the
disaster zone, data and information collected from the affected area are transmitted to the
Response Pillar Operations Center through the hybrid of human and technological network of the
Rapid Emergency Telecoms Team (RETT) and digital volunteers. For purposes of network security
and data integrity, a username and password are needed to access these platforms. These are
usually given to agencies and organizations during training long before disaster comes. Should this
be not the case, the Response Cluster Secretariat may be contacted at any given time during
operations.

Once again, the mission of the RCIMS is to gather and systematize data into actionable information
to aid DRRM managers, decision makers, response operatives, potential volunteers and donors, as
well as the affected population themselves.
                                                                                                  43




                 ANNEX I
                            Incident Management Team



Duties and Responsibilities

It is the primary responsibility of the Incident Management Team (IMT) to:

    As the overall in-charge of on-scene response decisions;
    Manage all resources checked-in;
    Receive and implement the directives of the RO;
    Ensure the safety of all personnel and other resources deployed for operations;
    Manages the provision of logistical requirements to support the conduct of the operations;
    Documents and reports all situation updates and actions taken to the RO through the EOC;
    Requests for additional resources from the RO through the EOC; and
    Facilitates the complete process on demobilization of resources.

Qualifications of an IMT Member

  Must come from a government agency/office, local government unit, civil society organization
   or private sector, or a private individual with authorization to operate in the area;
  Preferably must have completed the ICS training requirements and standards set by the OCD;
   and
  Must be allowed by the sending agency/ office/ unit/ organization to be deployed as an IMT
   member immediately even on short notice from the RO.

Selection of IMT Members
  The RO shall select the IC through Delegation of Authority;
  The IC shall select the appropriate members of the Command and General Staff to compose the
   whole IMT; and
  All selected IMT members shall temporarily be relieved from their regular office duties and
   responsibilities to perform in full-time the expected functions of their respective IMT
   positions.
                                                                                   44




             ANNEX II
          Operational Guidelines of the Response Clusters

SRR – Search, Rescue, and Retrieval (AFP)

ETC – Emergency Telecommunications (OCD)

HEALTH – with Sub-Clusters on: Medical, Water-Sanitation-Hygiene (WASH), Psycho-
         Social Integration (PSI), and Nutrition (DOH)

LAO – Law and Order (PNP)

CCCM - Camp Coordination and Camp Management (DSWD)

IDP PROTECTION – Internally Displaced Person (DSWD)

FNFI – Food and Non-Food Items (DSWD)

LOG – Logistics (OCD)

EDU – Education (DepEd)

MDM – Management of the Dead and Missing (DILG)

PIHAC – Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance (DFA)
                                                                                                   45

Search, Rescue, and Retrieval Cluster Operations Protocol
(NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of ______
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan

I.   RATIONALE

Loss of lives and casualties are the main concern of all government agencies involved in disaster
management. Pre-emptive evacuation have been the thrust of the government to save the lives of
those that will be affected by the incoming disaster, but no matter how government act there are
still those that are affected and needs to be rescue. The efficiency of doing response during disaster
relies on the timely and organized deployment of Search, Rescue and Retrieval teams. The
assistance given by the SRR teams during disaster and retrieval operations during post disaster are
critical services that are needed to further minimize loss of lives and casualties.

The Search, Rescue and Retrieval Cluster was created to have a separate cluster that will deal
directly on SRR Operations.

II. OBJECTIVE

The Search, Rescue and Retrieval Cluster shall provide support for an effective, efficient, organized
and systematic search, rescue and retrieval operations to disaster affected areas upon order to
minimize loss of lives and casualties. The SRR Cluster is the national organization that will
coordinate and deploy all available Search and Rescue teams from the government, civil society,
private sector and the international community.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

The Search, Rescue and Retrieval Cluster will coordinate SRR operations in response to earthquake
and tsunami disasters to the affected areas when directed by the NDRRMC to minimize the loss of
lives and casualty.

The SRR Cluster with the AFP as the lead has the following member agencies: DOH-HEMS, DILG, DA,
NFA, PCG, BFP, AFP, OCD, WFP, World Vision, and International Organization for Migration, FAO,
PRC, ADRA, CNDR and other organizations acknowledged by NDRRMC.

The SRR Cluster will have two components:

     A. Coordination of all SRR teams deployed at the affected areas; and
     B. Retrieval of the dead.

The casualties shall be handed-over to the Health Cluster for proper treatment and management
while the dead will be handed-over to the Management of the Dead and the Missing Cluster.
Upon requests submitted or given to the NDRRMC which will be communicated to the Cluster Lead,
the SRR Teams will proceed to the affected area and report to the local SRR Cluster Lead who will in
                                                                                              46

turn report to the established EOC in the affected area for proper deployment. All SRR Teams will
submit status reports to the EOC and the Cluster Lead. Demobilization will be done upon orders.

The following are the key players and actors in the implementation of this concept.

1. Lead Cluster Agency: DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE (DND) through the ARMED
                        FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP)

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Lead the coordination among the SRR cluster NDRRMC-members;
     b. Conduct Crisis action planning;
     c. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
     d. Coordinate with the Office of Civil Defense for the possible deployment of all available
         SRR Teams of all national agencies;
     e. Monitor and assess the situation
     f. Convene the SRR Cluster;
     g.    Provide SRR Teams for deployment to the affected areas in coordination with the
        National
         SRR Cluster Lead;
     h. Provide aerial assessment in support of NDRRMC’s Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs
        Analysis (RDANA) to determine the operational status of air and seaports and the
        accessibility of main supply routes; and
     i. Coordinate Search, Rescue and Retrieval (SRR) operations in support of the NDRRMC
        HADR operations

  2) Post Disaster Phase:
     a. Collects status reports and requests of the deployed SRR Teams on ground;
     b. Submits status, requests and proposed actions to the NDRRMC to integrate all activities
        at the NDRRMC Operations Center;
     c. Coordinate with other response clusters for their SRR requirements;
     d. Coordinate the hand-over responsibility to LGU;
     e. Consolidate reports and lessons learned on SRR operations;
     f. Prepare and submit a report of all SRR operations to the NDRRMC ; and
     g. Support other tasks as requested by the Chairperson, NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for
        Disaster Response

2. Cluster Member Agencies

   A. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DILG)

      1) During Disaster Phase
         a. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
         b. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
            possible deployment;
         a. Provide assistance in the deployment of SRR teams in the affected areas;
         b. Provide SRR teams to be deployed to the affected areas in coordination with the
            National SRR Cluster Lead; and
         c. Establish command posts at the Manila office and at the affected areas for multi-SRR
            teams including those from international agencies and INGOs.

      2) Post Disaster Phase
         a. Coordinate the turn-over of all retrieval operations to the LGU/s; and
                                                                                           47

     b. Support other tasks as requested by the Chairperson, NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for
        Disaster Response.

B. OFFICE OF THE CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)

     a. Monitor and collect situation reports from the LDRRM Operations Center;

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Monitor situation in the ground from LDRRM OpCen;
     b. Alert national SRR groups for possible activation;
     c. Coordinate the prepositioning of SRR groups in critical area;
     d. Issue and disseminate activation orders;
     e. Receive request for SRR augmentation;
     f. Issuance and dissemination of deployment orders; and
     g. Deploy SRR augmentation groups in coordination with the DRRMCs and Cluster head.

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Consolidate and prepare report for submission; and
     b. Conduct debriefing of SRR groups at the national level in coordination with DOH.

C. PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD (PCG)

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Provide DRGs with equipment to be deployed to the affected areas in coordination
        with
     b. Alert all Deployable Response Group (DRGs)/PCG Districts/Stations/Detachments for
        possible deployment for SRR operations;
     c. Standby all available floating and mobility assets for possible deployment; and
     d. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
        possible deployment.

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Conduct retrieval operations as per request by the Council; and
     b. Support other tasks as requested by the Chairperson, NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for
        Disaster Response

D. BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION (BFP)

   1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
     b. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
        possible deployment; and
     c. Provide Special Rescue Unit (SRU) for deployment in the affected areas in
        coordination with the National SRR Cluster Lead

   2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Assist in the collapse structure operations; and
     b. Support other tasks as requested by the Chairperson, NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for
        Disaster Response.
                                                                                         48

  E. PHILIPPINE RED CROSS (PRC)

     1) 1 During Disaster Phase - Provide required teams in disaster operations such as
        Emergency Response Unit (ERU), dead body management, Water Search and Rescue
        (WASAR), DSP, etc for deployment in the affected areas in coordination with the SRR
        cluster.

     2) Post Disaster Phase
        a. Conduct post-disaster needs assessment

  F. METRO MANILA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (MMDA)

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
        b. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
           possible deployment; and
        c. Provide SRR Teams available for deployment to the affected areas in coordination
           with the National SRR Cluster Lead.

     2) Post Disaster Phase - Support other tasks requested by the Chairperson,
         NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response.

  G. NGO, CSO, Volunteer Groups and Other Agencies recognized by the NDRRMC

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
        b. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
           possible deployment; and
        c. Provide SRR Teams available for deployment to the affected areas in coordination
           with the National SRR Cluster Lead.

     2) Post Disaster Phase - Support other tasks requested by the Chairperson,
          NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response

  H. PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE- (Maneuver Forces; SAF, RPSB, PPSC)

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Alert SRR teams for possible deployment for SRR operations;
        b. Submit to the Cluster Lead a list of available government SRR Teams for immediate
           possible deployment; and
        c. Provide SRR Teams for deployment to the affected areas in coordination with the
           National SRR Cluster Lead.

     3) Post Disaster Phase - Support other tasks requested by the Chairperson,
         NDRRMC/Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

  1. All SRR Teams will provide their own logistical requirements;
  2. The DND as Cluster Lead will coordinate all support and requirements of response
     committee in their activities to augment the requirements at the affected areas during
     disasters.; and
                                                                                             49

  3. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
     internal personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the
     NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.

V. COMMAND AND CONTROL

  1. Command Relationship – All DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
     as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 1021, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

  2. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
     (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City

     2.1 Succession of Command:
         a. Chairperson, NDRRMC (SND)
         b. Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response (S, DSWD)
         c. SRR Cluster Lead (SND)
         d. SRR Cluster Members

     2.2 Interagency Communication Support System

     For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
     utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will
     be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.

  3. Coordinating Instructions

     a. SRR Teams to coordinate with the Local SRR Cluster lead of the affected areas for proper
         endorsement to the Incident Command posts on ground;
     b. All member agencies are responsible for the continuous monitoring of the situation; and
     c. All SRR teams shall conduct after SRR operation de-briefing, prepare and submit
         operation report to the SRR Cluster Lead.
                                                                                                   50

Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC)
(NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: _______ of ________
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan (NDRP)

I. RATIONALE

During disaster, affected areas are so badly hit by earthquake and/or tsunami that Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) systems are rendered non-operational. These may result in the
non-availability of essential voice, data, Internet, television and radio broadcast services that are
critical during and post disaster management operations. There have been cases where LGUs
cannot seek help from other agencies of government or even their neighboring cities and
municipalities. In such cases, the activation of Emergency Telecommunications Cluster is required
to install, operate and maintain a system of communication that will reconnect the isolated LGUs’
Emergency Operations Centers to the NDRRMC’s Operation Center and system. Moreover, the
Emergency Telecommunications Cluster will also respond in all major emergencies when directed
by the NDRRMC and/or the Civil Defense Administrator, OCD, requested by other cluster Leads and
where the scale of the emergency is beyond the capacity of local government units.

The purpose of this guidelines is to provide an overarching framework to have an effective and
timely emergency telecommunications services to support other clusters in carrying out their
respective mandates safely and efficiently. The vast majority of Emergency Telecommunications
Cluster key players who will deliver on this protocol are based in the field, calling on regional and
even global level support as needed.

II.   OBJECTIVE
To achieve the Emergency Telecommunications Cluster goal, the broad objective for the cluster’s
strategy is to strengthen ICT capacities at the national Cluster level down to local levels to prepare
for, respond to and recover from the impacts of disasters.

This will be organized by providing a timely, resilient and predictable Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) support to improve:

      a. Response and coordination among response organizations;
      b. Decision-making through timely access to critical information;
      c. Common operational areas for disaster response;
      d. Common system standards and operating procedures;
      e. Standards based architecture for HADR Operations; and
      f. System architectures for compliance and interoperability.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On orders, the Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) to provide an effective and timely
emergency telecommunications services and ICT capacities at the national Cluster level down to
local levels in the affected disaster areas.
                                                                                                 51

This will be accomplished through the deployment of Rapid Emergency Telecommunications Team
(RETT) which will provide timely, resilient and predictable Information and Communications
Technology (ICT) support. OCD will be the lead agency supported by AFP, PNP, BFP, PCG NTC,
DSWD, and other NGOs, CSO, Volunteer Groups and other Civilian and Private Organizations
recognized and acknowledge by NDRRMC in order to support other clusters in carrying out their
respective mandates safely and efficiently as they prepare for, respond to and help in the recovery
from the impacts of disasters.

At the end of the operations, RETT will be deactivated when full normalcy of the telecommunication
system services of the affected areas is attained. RETT will follow formal hand-over of the ICT
responsibility to concerned government unit.

The following are the key players and actors in the implementation of this concept.

1. Lead Cluster Agency: OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD) through the CEIS Division

   1) During Disaster Phase
      a. Act as the single focal point of national and/or local government authorities on behalf of
         the humanitarian community for all radio, voice and data communications-related
         capabilities including frequency allocation, communications network diagrams, and
         mobilization of ICT resources;
      b. Alert and organize the Rapid Emergency Telecommunications Teams (RETT) and conduct
         immediate inventory of their ICT equipment on-hand;
      c. Pre-program all radios to the assigned disaster frequencies and ensure communications
         interoperability;
      d. Provide radio nets, call signs and manage the frequencies allocated by NTC;
      e. Provide a platform directory services containing the contact information of the different
         ICT key players;
      f. In coordination with Logistics Cluster, make available mobility assets, protective
         suits/gears, shelters/Tents, basic provisions and other essential needs of the RETT for the
         establishment of On-site EOCs;
      g. Provide standards for common ICT equipment and procedures;
      h. Provide ICT services support for other clusters as needed;
      i. Support by sending warning advisories to OCDRC/RDRRMC and LGUs, NDRRMC member
         agencies;
      j. Collect information regarding the impending disaster and corresponding situations of
         preparedness by LGUs and related agencies and inform/report them to N/RDRRMCs;
      k. Conduct scenario based pre-deployment planning meeting in a predefined location/s;
      l. Collect and record all activities of the RETT members for review and documentations
      m. Provide basic telecommunications coverage around the main operational area for the
         Command Center and other responders;
      n. Establish and maintain On-Site Command Operations Coordinating Center (OSOCC) in
         disaster area/s through the deployment of RETT;
      o. Programming of radios or other equipment belonging to individual responders,
         organizations and other key players in disaster areas for interoperability;
      p. Install and maintain internal ICT systems between clusters and individuals independent
         from national or local public services;
      q. Establish a dedicated GSM/LTE mobile network to be used by the cluster workers in the
         operational area in partnership with TELCO(s);
      r. Publish and maintain a list of GSM providers and availability of 2G/3G/4G/LTE and data
         services and its availability and reliability on partnership with TELCO(s);
      s. Provide and update a directory services containing the contact information of the
         different key players in disaster areas implied in a specific humanitarian mission;
                                                                                             52

     t. Conduct repair and maintenance activities as needed;
     u. Receive and consolidate reports related to ICT resources;
     v. Dispatch the RETT as per instruction from the NDRRMC and/or CDA, OCD; and
     w. Coordinate with the RETT on ground for updates and operational requirements.

   2) Post Disaster Phase
      a. Coordinate the preparation of documentation for ETC requirements, lesson learned, and
         best practices;
      b. ETC and/or RETT to deactivate all emergency telecommunication systems as soon as full
         resumption of the LGU's communication system is achieved;
      c. Coordinate PDNA activities in case it will be conducted by the National/Regional level;
      d. Receive and consolidate reports;
      e. Consolidate records of all events and activity conducted by each member of RETT; and
      f. Conduct debriefing to all ETC-RETT members.

2. Cluster Members

  A. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD) through Information
     Management Bureau (IMB)

   1) During Disaster Phase
      a. Alert all DRTs, SWAD team, 4Ds and KCC personnel at the local level or the impending
         disaster thru WiServ SMS Service;
      b. Operate 24/7 the Disaster Response Operations Monitoring and Information Center that
         will receive reports from the DSWD Field Offices;
      c. Make available the Online DSWD Disaster Response Situation Map showing all existing
         Evacuation Centers and population at risk;
      d. Ensure multimodal voice and data communication for all DSWD field offices and
         warehouses.
      e. Activate and deploy DRTs, SWAD Teams, NPS and KCC personnel in the affected areas to
         conduct rapid assessment and provide TARA in DRRM programs and projects;
      f. Prepare data for FOS thru WiServ and shall consolidate thru DRRMC;
      g. Deploy national RETT to hardest hit regions;
      h. Regularly convene the DSWD-led Cluster response through ETC;
      i. Deploy 24/7 DSWD representative at the DRMMC OpCen for RETT-ETC;
      j. Collaborate with DRRMCs at all levels for cross-cutting concerns;
      k. Update the Online DSWD Disaster Response Situation Map showing all activated
         Evacuation Centers, donation drop off points and affected population at risk; and
      l. Utilize social media in communicating updates, volunteer mobilization and request for
         augmentation

   2) Post Disaster Phase
      a. Participate to the post RETT-ETC evaluation;
      b. Conduct Project Implementation Review (PIR) after disaster operations - Clusters,
         DSWD-FOS, Sub-Committee on Response;
      c. Conduct hand-over of RETT-ETC duties during Early Recovery and Rehabilitation
         Planning; and
      d. Submit Terminal report to OCD.

B. NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (NTC)

     a. Shall perform Frequency Manager to RETT-ETC;
     b. Monitor Telecom Network Situation;
                                                                                             53

     c. Shall ensure availability of Radio Frequency for DRRM;
     d. Shall man their staff to confirm and restore the function of the communication being
        managed by their own;
     e. Shall report the statuses of communication conditions of each mean, such as radio wave
        communication service to DICT;
     f. Shall exert all efforts to newly create or revive the redundant radio wave communication
        for emergency information communication under the coordination of the DICT
        Headquarter;
     g. Shall need to put effort on proper and uninterrupted operation of communication, by
        allocating staff to disaster area and implementing communication control, to deal with
        problems such as interference during congestion of communication in radio
        transmission stations at the time of disaster; and
     h. Shall provide National Interagency Radio Support systems for use by disaster response
        teams to report information from the disaster area to the DRRMCs and such other
        applications as determined by the radio communications coordinator.

C. ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP) through the Deputy Chief of Staff for
   Communications, Electronics and Information System, J6

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide personnel/technical and equipment assistance for communication between
        disaster site and DRRMCs, consistent with defense priorities;
     b. Shall coordinate with the DRRMCs on the optimum employment of communications
        assets, both manpower and equipment;
     c. Shall establish operations procedures consistent with the communications flow of the
        DRRMCs;
     d. Shall assist the DRRMCs in managing the spectrum by discouraging employment of
        unauthorized communications equipment; and
     e. Perform other tasks as directed.

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide DRRMCs the good practices employed during the disaster phase to serve as
         “lessons learned” documents;
     b. Shall be prepared to provide debriefing as part of communications education;
     c. Shall conduct retraining of technical personnel and refurbish ICT equipment to ensure
         operational readiness status; and
     d. Perform other tasks as directed.

D. PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD (PCG) through Deputy Chief of Coast Guard Staff for Coast
  Guard Maritime Communications, Weapons, Electronics & Information System, CG-11

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Disseminate early warning on weather forecast issued by PHIVOLCS to coastal
        barangays, local fisher folks and other maritime stake holders through effective and
        fastest means of communications (text, Notice to Mariner, VHF/HF radio and e- mail);
     b. Shall be responsible for assessing and collecting the degree of damage related to sea
        navigation, immediately after a hydro- meteorological disaster, especially a tropical
        cyclone disaster, and report DRRMCs, if navigation of marine vessels are found unsafe,
        due by wrecked ships and floating debris and other objects; and
     c. Shall    provide     communications    assistance    and     render reports/updates on
        activities and incidents to DRRMC and Cluster Lead.
                                                                                             54


  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Provide reports of debriefing activities;
     b. Shall provide DRRMCs the good practices employed during the disaster phase to serve as
         “lessons learned” documents;
     c. Shall be prepared to provide debriefing as part of communications education; and
     d. Shall conduct retraining of technical personnel and refurbish ICT equipment to ensure
         operational readiness status.

E. BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION (BFP) through Management Information Service, Fire
   Control Operation Center, and COMMEL Section, BFP

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide personnel/technical and equipment assistance for communication between
        disaster site and DRRMCs, consistent with defense priorities;
     b. Shall coordinate with the DRRMCs on the optimum employment of communications
        assets, both manpower and equipment;
     c. Shall establish operations procedures consistent with the communications flow of the
        DRRMCs;
     d. Shall assist the DRRMCs in managing the spectrum by discouraging employment of
        unauthorized communications equipment; and
     e. Perform other tasks as directed

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide DRRMCs the good practices employed during the disaster phase to serve as
         “lessons learned” documents;
     b. Shall be prepared to provide debriefing as part of communications education; and
     c. Shall conduct retraining of technical personnel and refurbish ICT equipment to ensure
         operational readiness status.

F. PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) through the National Operations Center and the
   Communications Electronics Service

  1) During Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide assistance in communication between disaster site and DRRMCs;
     b. Maintain communications connectivity (voice and data) between NDRRMC/LDRRMC and
        PNP NOC/RTOC;
     c. Provide equipment support;
     d. Provide technical assistance to radio users and to maintain serviceability of all issued
        communication equipment & system for PNP units deployed in disaster area; and
     e. Ensure availability & operational readiness of all issued equipment.

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Shall provide DRRMCs the good practices employed during the disaster phase to serve as
         “lessons learned” documents;
     b. Shall be prepared to provide debriefing as part of communications education; and
     c. Shall conduct retraining of technical personnel and refurbish ICT equipment to ensure
         operational readiness status.
                                                                                                 55

G. NGOs, CSO, Volunteer Groups and other Civilian and Private Organizations recognized and
   acknowledged by NDRRMC

  1) During Disaster Phase
      a. Identify Key People and Resources for Disaster Response (work with Cluster members
          for easy transport and facilitation);
      b. Network Resiliency Check for both wired and wireless;
      c. Ensure that all alert/monitoring systems running on network are available (Infoboard,
          Social Media assets, NOAH, Weather alerts)
      d. If functional, Informing and Alerting Systems to be used during the Disaster;
             - Cell Broadcast, in accordance with NDRRMC request;
             - Establish an InfoText;
             - Communications Support to Responders;
             - Libreng Tawag/Cellphone Charging Stations/Internet;
             - Social Media engagements via Rappler, Relief.PH, rescue.ph;
             - Provision of reports for areas with no signals or communication networks; and
             - Act as courier/messenger using motorcycle/bikes if needed arises.
      e. Deployment of Quick Communications Solution
             - Satellite voice communications (Thuraya SatSleeves for Iphone);
             - Satellite Internet (BGAN);
             - Instant Network (in partnership with Vodafone and Telecoms Sans Frontiers);
             - Cell site – On - Wheels (prepositioned with satellite); and
             - Connectivity augmentation in OpCen

      f. Social Media and other Emerging Technologies*
            - Crisis mapping;
            - Big data analytics; and
            - Mobile apps

  2) Post Disaster Phase
         a. Network Audit for Fixed and Wireless to consider 'adaptation' strategies;
         b. Ensure that all alert/monitoring systems running on network are available
            (Infoboard, Social Media assets, NOAH, Weather alerts); and
         c. Perform other request as directed.

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

   A. The OCD as Cluster Lead will coordinate the dispatch of the RETT and will handle all its
      needs to support its operation at the affected area;
   B. All members of the cluster acting on request from the OCD will make available necessary
      and operational telecommunication equipment at the disposal of the RETT at the affected
      area.; and
   C. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
      personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the NDRRMC in
      collaboration with all Council members.
                                                                                           56

V. COMMAND AND CONTROL

  A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
     as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 1021, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

  B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
     (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

    1. Succession of Command:

       a. Emergency Telecommunications Cluster Lead (OCD-CEISD)
       b. Emergency Telecommunications Cluster Members

    2. Interagency Communication System Support

  For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
  utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will be
  activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                57

   HEALTH CLUSTER [Health (Public Health and Medical],
   Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), Nutrition, Mental
   Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS)]
   (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of ______
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

In emergencies and disasters, the delivery of appropriate and timely public health and medical
interventions is critical in order to save lives and decrease preventable mortalities, morbidities,
injuries and disabilities. The Health Cluster is headed by the Department of Health through its
Health Emergency Management Bureau (HEMB) in collaboration with local government units and
key stakeholders which is tasked to lead four (4) key sub-clusters:

      A.   Health (Public Health and Medical);
      B.   Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH);
      C.   Nutrition; and
      D.   Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS)

Each of the said sub-clusters answers defined outcomes and objectives in the response plan
working harmoniously with one another and with other clusters in large scale disaster response in
the country.

II. OBJECTIVE

   GENERAL. The Health Cluster aims to ensure access to quality, appropriate and timely health
services to the affected population.

  SPECIFIC. The following are the specific objectives of the Sub-Cluster of Health:

  A. Health
        a. To manage injuries and acute conditions;
        b. To provide Maternal and Child Health services;
        c. To provide Minimum Initial Service Package for Sexual and Reproductive Health;
        d. To prevent and control spread of communicable and non-communicable diseases;
            and
        e. To ensure functionality of the Health Referral system.

  B. WASH
       a. To assess WASH conditions in the evacuation centers;
       b. To identify possible sources of water;
       c. To conduct water quality surveillance, disinfection and treatment; and
                                                                                                    58

          d. To ensure provision of sanitation facilities, excreta disposal and solid waste
             management.

  C. Nutrition
        a. To conduct Rapid Nutrition Assessment;
        b. To support infant and child feeding;
        c. To manage acute malnutrition cases; and
        d. To promote proper nutrition in emergencies and disasters.

  D. Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
        a. To provide Psychological First Aid to the general population;
        b. To refer Psychiatric cases to appropriate Mental Health Facilities;
        c. To protect and promote well-being of responders; and
        d. To provide psychological interventions to survivors of sexual violence and
            vulnerable groups (OPs, PWDs, PWSNs, etc).

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

   1. The Department of Health, as mandated, shall provide and ensure the provision of health
      services of Filipinos at all times. And as lead agency of the Health Cluster, together with the
      members of the cluster will respond with all available resources to preserve and protect the
      lives of our countrymen during disasters and incident that threaten their well-being;

   2. The Health Cluster will observe three (3) different phases of operation: pre-incident, during
      incident and post-incident. At each distinct phase, specific activities and interventions will be
      carried out;

   3. During the pre-incident phase, intra-cluster coordination and information sharing will be
      strengthened. These will be accomplished through positive joint capacity resource sharing
      that will be initiated by the DOH;

   4. The incident phase shall commence upon activation of the Response Cluster of the NDRRMC.
      The Health Cluster will readily convene and initiate appropriate and necessary interventions.
      The DOH will notify its attached agencies, Regional Offices and Retained Hospitals to provide
      needed health services as part of consequence management. Health Cluster members will be
      provided with updated situational reports and will be consulted accordingly in the
      implementation of their assigned task;

   5. In response to hydro-meteorological hazard that affects health, the DOH shall be the office of
      primary responsibility. As such, it shall establish an Emergency Operation Center operating
      the 4Cs (command, control, coordination and communication). Moreover, the Health Cluster
      will deliver the broad spectrum of health interventions aligned with the QUAD cluster
      services (Medical and Public Health, WASH, Nutrition and MHPSS). Such will be completed
      by mobilization of response teams and provision of logistics. During operation, teams
      deployed by the Health Cluster will be placed under the supervision of the Operations
      Section Chief of existing Incident Management Team in-charge of the incident or disaster.
      Concurrently, the DOH will represent the Health Cluster at the Emergency Operation Center
      to provide additional support if necessary; and

   6. Termination of operation will be upon the instructions of the NDRRMC Chairperson or of the
      Response Pillar. Health Cluster Response Teams under IMT will be demobilized as stated in
      their deployment mission order and responsible office specific requirements.
                                                                                               59

Lead Cluster: The Health Cluster, in which the DOH is the Lead Agency, is one of eleven clusters.



The involved clusters and their lead agencies are the following:

     1. Food and Non-Food Items Cluster – DSWD
     2. Health Cluster - DOH
     3. Protection Camp Coordination and Management Cluster - DSWD
     4. Logistics Cluster - OCD
     5. Emergency Telecommunications Cluster - OCD
     6. Education Cluster - DepEd
     7. Search Rescue and Retrieval Cluster - DND
     8. Management of the Dead and Missing Cluster – DILG
     9. Internally Displaced Cluster -DSWD
     10. Phiilippine International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster -DFA
     11. Law and Order - PNP

1. Lead Cluster Agency: DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH)

     1) During Disaster Phase (Health-Public Health and Medical), WASH, Nutrition, and
        MHPSS)
        a. Release alert memo to all Regional Offices and hospitals if applicable;
        b. Activate SMART InfoText;
        c. Activate command system in affected areas;
        d. Activate Operation Centers;
        e. Activate the health emergency response plan;
        f. Raise code alert in Regional Offices and hospitals as appropriate;
        g. Develop RDANA standards to be used by Regional Level
        h. Conduct inventory of logistics (both CO and ROs);
        i. Preposition logistics in ROs;
        j. Organize Stand-by Response Teams;
        k. Conduct continuous monitoring and dissemination of information updates;
        l. Organize, attend and send representatives to cluster and other coordination meetings
           Deploy teams to conduct Rapid Health Assessment (RHA);
        m. Deploy teams to evacuation centers and priority communities in affected areas;
        n. Augment logistics;
        o. Provide field treatment, first aid and pre-hospital care;
        p. Provide health services (e.g general consultation and treatment, immunization,
           reproductive health services, chemoprophylaxis, health education, promotion and
           advocacy including basic sanitation, nutrition and psychosocial support, etc);
        q. Activate referral system;
        r. Perform patient referral/conduction to health facilities;
        s. Provide hospital services;
        t. Activate surveillance and reporting systems;
        u. Conduct health facility assessment, immediate cleaning/clearing activities and repair
           to restore functionality;
        v. Provide continuous monitoring; and
        w. Organize, attend and send representatives to cluster and other coordination meetings
           (e.g. PDNA/DANA/DALA,etc)
                                                                                          60

   During Disaster Phase (WASH)
   a. Conduct Rapid WASH Assessment;
   b. Augment WASH logistics (e.g. water containers, water disinfectants, hygiene kits,
      water testing reagents fund/supplies for toilet construction, and other WASH
      commodities);
   c. Augment provision of safe drinking water through the mobilization of water
      treatment units, water distribution tanks, and water storage tanks;
   d. Coordinate installation/construction of toilet facilities; repair/restoration of water
      facilities; hygiene promotion from WASH Cluster members and partners;
   e. Provide technical assistance in the installation and construction of toilet facilities;
      waste management; and vector control;
   f. Assist in continuous water quality monitoring;
   g. Continuous monitoring and reporting of WASH activities and services; and
   h. Organize, attend and send representatives to cluster and other coordination meetings
      (e.g. PDNA/DANA/DALA,etc)

   During Disaster Phase (Nutrition)

   a. Conduct Rapid Nutrition Assessment;
   b. Augment nutrition logistics (e.g. Vitamin A, multiple micro-nutrient packs, ferrous
      sulfate and folic acid, MUAC tapes, weighing scale, weight-for-height reference table,
      height board, breast-feeding kit);
   c. Coordinate the following with cluster members/partners: provision of ready-to-use
      supplementary and therapeutic food (RUTF/RUSF); human milk banking;
   d. Assist in the conduct of general and blanket supplementary feeding;
   e. Coordinate the mobilization of nutrition assessment teams, infant feeding, and breast-
      feeding support groups;
   f. Assist in the referral of severely malnourished patients to appropriate facilities;
   g. Continuous monitoring and reporting of malnutrition cases and interventions; and
   h. Organize, attend and send representatives to cluster and other coordination meetings
      (e.g. PDNA/DANA/DALA,etc)

   During Disaster Phase (MHPSS)

   a.  Conduct Rapid MHPSS Assessment;
   b.  Augment psychotropic medications;
   c.  Coordinate the mobilization of MHPSS teams;
   d.  Assist in the following: provision of psychological first aid; activation of community
       and family support systems; and provision of other specialized MHPSS services;
   e. Assist in the referral of cases to higher level of care;
   f. Continuous monitoring and reporting of MHPSS cases and interventions; and
   g. Organize, attend and send representatives to cluster and other coordination meetings
       (e.g. PDNA/DANA/DALA,etc)

2) Post-Disaster Phase (Health – Public Health and Medical, WASH, Nutrition, and
  MHPSS)
   a. Continue deployment of teams as necessary;
   b. Continue logistics provision as necessary;
   c. Continue provision of health, WASH, nutrition and MHPSS services;
   d. Continue monitoring of health conditions;
   e. Repair and rehabilitate damaged health facilities;
   f. Conduct post-incident evaluation;
   g. Document lessons learned and good practices; and
                                                                                                  61

         h. Generate necessary reports

NOTE: In the event of a Mega Disaster (e.g 7.2M Earthquake, Intensity 8)
      a. DOH CO or other non-affected RO assumes command and control of the Cluster on site;
      b. Mobilize all resources of the DOH to the affected regions; and
      c. Prioritize response over regular activities by all DOH offices and attached agencies.

2. Cluster Member Agencies. These are the other agencies needed to support the DOH in its role
   as the Lead Agency for the Health Cluster. The following are the respective roles of the different
   agencies in support of the Cluster:

  A. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)
     a. Assist in the provision of medical and health emergency services to the affected
        population in coordination with the Health Cluster Lead or the head of the deployed
        emergency health teams;
     b. Ensure the provision of facilities within the evacuation centers that would be conducive to
        good health outcomes (e.g. breastfeeding corner, space for pregnant and lactating
        mothers, gender sensitive toilet and bathing facilities, medical consultation area, priority
        lane for vulnerable population, etc.);
     c. Take the lead in the provision of MHPSS services in evacuation centers and refer to the
        Health Cluster patients needing specialized care; and
     d. Coordinate with the Health Cluster regarding milk donations.

  B. OFFICE OF THE CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)
     a. Assist Health Cluster in the transport of medical teams and health logistics;
     b. Provide space at OCD logistics hubs for prepositioning of health logistics;
     c. Refer health related donations to the Health Cluster for clearance prior to acceptance;
     d. Refer foreign health teams to the Health Cluster for registration, coordination and
        deployment except for foreign military teams;
     e. Copy furnish Health Cluster with the post mission of the health component of foreign
        military teams involved in medical missions; and
     f. Provide Health Cluster access to emergency telecommunications facilities.

  C. DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE (DND) through AFP (OTSG)
     a. Be prepared to provide Ambu-Medical Teams in support of the DOH for Health
        Emergency and Management Service mission;
     b. Be prepared to provide transportation support for the DOH-led medical teams during
        deployment;
     c. Be prepared to provide security personnel for the DOH-led medical teams deployed in
        disaster-affected areas;
     d. Participate in Health Cluster meetings;
     e. Coordinate with other foreign military medical team augmentation through the Multi-
        National Coordinating Center (MNCC) for their deployment and security;
     f. Coordinate with the DOH medical team for the hand-over of rescued victims;
     g. Be prepared to provide Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) team and
        trauma team in support of DOH;
     h. Take the lead in the provision of MHPSS services for military personnel and families and
        refer to the Health Cluster patients needing specialized care;
     i. Be prepared to provide the Health Cluster access to the use of military health
        facilities/station hospitals;
     j. Provide Health Cluster reports on medical missions conducted; and
                                                                                                62

  k. As disaster first responders, provide/ share rapid medical/ health assessment
     information to the Health Custer hierarchy

D. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DILG)
   a. Facilitate coordination of DOH with LCE for Health Cluster Operations; and
   b. Assist the Health Response Teams in coordinating with the LCEs

E. PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) through the Health Service and Women and Children
   Protection Center.
   a. Provide security for health teams and logistics in disaster areas;
   b. Provide transport for Health Cluster personnel and logistics, if available;
   c. Coordinate with Health Cluster on the movement and activities of their health personnel;
   d. Refer to the Health Cluster victims of violence and patients needing specialized care;
   e. Provide Health Cluster access to use of police health facilities; and
   f. Provide Health Cluster reports on medical missions conducted

F. BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION (BFP)
   a. Coordinate with Health Cluster in the augmentation and mobilization of their health
      personnel;
   b. Assist in the distribution of water supply, and cleaning/ clearing of health facilities; and
   c. Provide Health Cluster reports on medical missions conducted

G. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (DepEd)
   a. Ensure the provision of facilities within schools used as evacuation centers that would be
      conducive to good health outcomes (e.g. breastfeeding corner, space for pregnant and
      lactating mothers, gender sensitive toilet and bathing facilities, medical consultation area,
      etc.);
   b. Take the lead in the provision of MHPSS services in schools and refer to the Health Cluster
      patients needing specialized care; and
   c. Assist in school-based surveillance and immunization activities upon Health Cluster
      request.

H. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (DOTr) through the PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD
  (PCG)
  a. Provide security for health teams and logistics during sea travel in high risk areas;
  b. Provide transport for Health Cluster personnel and logistics;
  c. Provide access to use of air and sea assets for emergency medical evacuation;
  d. Coordinate with the Health Cluster on the movement and activities of their health
     personnel;
  e. Provide the Health Cluster with access to use of PCG health facilities; and
  f. Provide the Health Cluster with reports on medical missions conducted.

I. DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (DFA)
   a. Coordinate with the Health Cluster with regard to the entry, processing, and deployment of
      Foreign Medical Teams (FMT) and other health related teams; and
   b. Coordinate with the Health Cluster regarding foreign donations.

J. PHILIPPINE RED CROSS (PRC)
   a. Assist the lead cluster agency in the provision of its available resources related to health
      responses that can contribute to addressing the medical and psychosocial needs of
      community affected population through the deployment of first aid teams in evacuation
                                                                                                 63

         centers, mobilization of logistical assets such as equipment and medical personnel in the
         possible setup of an emergency field hospital based on the gaps in medical infrastructure.
      b. Assist in the provision of safe and potable water through the deployment of available water
         filtration units and storage containers (jerry can) as well as personnel such as hygiene
         promoters to conduct hygiene promotion sessions in the communities upon its conduct of
         assessment.
      c. Ensure access to sufficient blood and blood products in times of emergencies and disaster
         through its network of blood service facilities nationwide.
      d. Assist in the conduct of community based psychosocial support activities and setup of
         welfare desks in evacuation centers targeting beneficiaries in the community affected
         population.


     K. Volunteers/Civil Society Organizations/ and other Health Sector Partners
        a. Coordinate with the Health Cluster in the conduct of Health Cluster Operation activities
           (e.g. registration, deployment, assignment, etc.); and
        b. Provide Health Cluster reports on Health Cluster Operations activities conducted

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

      A. The DOH as Cluster Lead will coordinate all support and requirements of the Health
         Cluster in their activities to augment the requirements at the affected areas during
         disasters.
      B. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
         internal personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the
         NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.

V.    COMMAND AND CONTROL

      A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and base their actions
         as prescribed in the IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

      B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
         (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

         1. Succession of Command:
            a. Chairperson, NDRRMC (S, DND)
            b. Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response (S, DSWD)
            c. Health Cluster Lead (DOH)
            d. Health Cluster Members

         2. Interagency Communication System Support
            For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
            utilized or whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster
            will be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                  64

   Law and Order Operations Protocol
   (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of _____
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan

I. RATIONALE

Loss of lives and casualties, protection and preservation of the populace and properties, security of
responding personnel and the populace in general are the main concerns of all government
agencies involved in disaster management and response operations, specifically the Security, Law
and Order requirements.

The efficiency of doing security response operations during disasters relies on the timely and
organized deployment of security forces. The disaster shall include but not be limited to tsunamis,
earthquakes, landslides and other natural disasters that may lead to immense loss of lives and
properties

The Law and Order Cluster shall organize to deal directly with the security needs of member
agencies and the community.

In order to keep abreast with the national government’s enhanced concepts on disaster risk
reduction and management system, an inter-agency cooperation between agencies with law
enforcement functions shall align their respective disaster operations and procedures with the
National Disaster Response Plan (NDRP).

II. OBJECTIVE

The Law and Order Cluster will assist the Response Operations and provide assistance to the
affected areas through the:
    a. Provision of security to the Response Clusters operating in the affected area;
    b. Provision of traffic management that will facilitate the speedy movement of people, goods
        and equipment to the affected population and responding agencies; and
    c. Enforce law and order in the community through the provision of information on the
        disaster response operations and the maintenance of community policing to reduce or
        arrest criminality in the area.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On orders, the PNP as lead in the Law and Order and Security Operations together with the
members of the Law and Order Cluster; BJMP, Bureau of Corrections (BuCor), AFP, PCG, BFP, and
such other agencies as may be called upon by the PNP Lead Cluster, will assist the Response
Operations by providing security and other law and order measures. Other agencies may be
included based on their law enforcement functions, as situation warrants.

Clusters members shall maintain interoperability through their established Operations Center
(OPCEN). At the Provincial levels down to the Municipalities and Barangays, the leadership in the
                                                                                                65

conduct of law and order shall be determined by the Local DRRMCs depending which component of
government (AFP, PNP, BFP, LGU-CSO) is necessary.

The Law and Order Cluster shall perform its task in coordination with the designated Incident
Commander through the Incident Management Team (IMT), security operations will be conducted
through collaborative efforts with cluster member agencies and other agencies to ensure that safety
and security is being maintained in the area.

The condition/s that will trigger the deployment of security personnel on Law and Order
operations will depend on:

   A. Orders from NDRRMC Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or from the President; and,
   B. The result of the Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA) conducted by
      LDRRMC concerned in the affected area/s. Result of RDANA shall be provided immediately to
      NDRRMC Operations Center to determine what security response is needed.

The Law and Order shall consider the immediate establishment of communications through
Emergency Telecommunication Cluster and advance command post from the possible affected
areas by the nearest territorial forces to stabilize security situation.

1. Lead Cluster Agency: PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP)

      1) During Disaster Phase
         a. Establish Command Post and Sub-Command Post in the possible affected area;
            Situational/regular conduct of police presence (Mobile, Motorcycle and foot patrol) at
            the possible area that may be affected;
         b. Review of the Crime Environment in the possible affected area;
         c. Participate in the conduct of PDRA (Regional, Provincial, City, Municipal and /or
            Barangay level);
         d. Prepare appropriate number of security personnel to identified evacuation areas in
            coordination with LGUs;
         e. Recommend to OCD to conduct trainings to improve inter-operability among member
            agencies;
         f. Activate the Law and Order Security Response Unit (SRU) with the established PNP
            Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures (CIMOP) in collaboration with
            member support agencies;
         g. Prioritize strategic support (land, air and sea transport with consideration of other
            response agencies);
         h. Prepare SRU based on the immediate requirements on the ground;
         i. Participate in the conduct of Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA) (Regional,
            Provincial, City, Municipal and /or Barangay level);
         j. Establish coordination with the local DRRMCs; and
         k. Perform other tasks as directed

      2) Post Disaster Phase
         a. Submit Get reports on the damage assessments and Needs analysis of affected areas;
         b. Provide security to evacuation areas in collaboration with other agencies and force
             multipliers;
         c. Assist in the relief and recovery operations and maintain Law and Order to affected
             areas;
         d. Conduct debriefing and Post assessment review; and
         e. Perform other tasks as directed
                                                                                                66

2. Cluster Member Agencies

  A. ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Be prepared to provide security augmentation (infantry unit/s; K9 team/s; EOD
           team/s; CDM units) in support of the PNP’s law enforcement operations;
        b. Be prepared to provide security augmentations at the designated evacuation centers in
           support of the PNP;
        c. Be prepared to provide security augmentation in securing the repacking, transport and
           distribution of relief goods at the evacuation and/or distribution areas in support of
           the PNP, LGU and DSWD; and
        d. Perform other tasks as directed

     2) Post Disaster Phase:
        a. Coordinate with the PNP for the release of security augmentation;
        b. Consolidate security units for redeployment;
        c. Be prepared to participate in Law and Order Cluster planning meeting/s;
        d. Coordinate with PNP for the capability enhancement program/inter-agency training;
           and
        e. Perform other tasks as directed

  B. BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION (BFP)

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Mobilize and deploy personnel in the identified affected area in coordination with their
           respective DRRMC;
        b. Assists in the security requirements of evacuation centers; and
        c. Perform other tasks as directed

     2) Post Disaster Phase
        a. Assist in the security; and
        b. Perform other tasks as directed

  C. BUREAU OF JAIL MANAGEMENT & PENOLOGY (BJMP) / BUREAU OF CORRECTIONS

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Conduct rapid damage and needs assessment of the whole facility to determine the
           soundness of the Prison’s block;
        b. Prioritize the security of the inmates. Ensure all inmates are accounted for;
        c. Report all jailbreaks immediately; and
        d. Perform other tasks as directed

  D. PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD (PCG)

     1) During Disaster Phase
        a. Deploy appropriate number of security personnel to devastated areas;
        b. Support other tasks as requested by Cluster Lead; and
        c. Perform other tasks as directed

     2) Post Disaster Phase
        a. Maintain necessary security requirements; and
        b. Perform other tasks as directed
                                                                                                  67


      E. VOLUNTEERS/CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS
         All Volunteer force multipliers will coordinate with the local Cluster Lead for briefing and
         deployment to the affected areas.

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

     A. The PNP as Cluster Lead will coordinate all movement of incoming products, personnel and
        equipment from the point of embankment prior to turnover to the Response Clusters activated
        for any disaster: and
     B. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
        internal personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the
        NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.

V.   COMMAND AND CONTROL

     A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions as
        prescribed in IRR of R.A. 1021, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

     B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
        (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

        1. Succession of Command:

           a.   Chairperson, NDRRMC (S, DND)
           b.   Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response (S, DSWD)
           c.   LAO Cluster Lead (PNP)
           d.   LAO Cluster Members

        2. Interagency Communication System Support
           For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
           utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will
           be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                 68

    Camp Coordination and Camp Management Cluster (CCCM)
    (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of _____
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

There is a need to immediately move the disaster affected individuals and families to safe, secure
and accessible evacuation centers or safe areas because of the threat of or the actual occurrence of
disasters which may cause loss of lives and destruction of properties. The orderly movement of
families from community of origin to safe, secure, and accessible evacuation centers and areas
(school facilities, multi-purpose centers, health centers, barangay halls, chapels, churches,
government buildings, tents and bunk houses) is one of the most difficult tasks to undertake and
manage when done only during emergencies. The safety of the displaced individuals and families or
population is the primary consideration but the availability of resources and the magnitude of the
disaster are complicating factors in the timeliness of the response.

The CCCM cluster will support the LGUs after undertaking all means of pre-emptive and or forced
evacuation action in order to protect and save lives.

II. OBJECTIVE

The CCCM Cluster aims to provide timely and well-coordinated humanitarian assistance and
augmentation support in the management of the evacuation center.

Specific objectives of the cluster are:

    a. To ensure the availability of identified safe, secure and accessible evacuation centers for
       emergencies and disasters;
    b. To ensure that temporary refuge to individual and families potentially at risk or in actual
       danger are immediately provided;
    c. To ensure establishment of sex and age disaggregated data e.g. listing and profiling of
       affected families and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in evacuation centers or
       temporary displacement sites;
    d. To ensure that all IDPs in evacuation centers are provided with basic humanitarian needs
       compliant with SPHERE standards such as, but not limited to food with enough nutritional
       values, potable water, clothing, family items, hygiene kits and other essential non-food
       items;
    e. To ensure that Basic Medical public health and protection services are available 24/7;
    f. To ensure that energy source and communication facilities are in place;
    g. Ensure that ECs are off limits and have designated areas for pet animals and livestock; and
    h. Shall continue to seek opportunities for recovery, rehabilitation and developmental tasks as
       post response activities are undertaken, in case of prolonged stay.
                                                                                                  69

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On orders the CCCM Cluster aims to provide timely and well-coordinated humanitarian assistance
and augmentation support in the management of the evacuation center, to ensure that needs of the
disaster affected families are attended to appropriately.

This shall be accomplished using the CCCM Cluster wherein the DSWD leads the operation and does
all the main coordinating function with other partners/stakeholders especially with key
players/service providers such as the Department of Education and the Department of Health, to
ensure that facilities inside the evacuation center are established and basic services are accessible
and available when needed.

The DSWD as Cluster Lead shall also coordinate all support and requirements of the affected LGUs
for evacuation centers’ sustained operations both those under the supervision of the LGU, DepEd
and other privately-owned places utilized during disasters;

Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective internal
personnel in support to CCCM operation. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated
through the NDRRMC Response Pillar in collaboration with all other Response Clusters.

Alert Level and Level of Response


  ALERT                                  RESPONSE TRIGGERS
  LEVEL              AGENCY              SPECIFIC CLUSTER            INTER-CLUSTER
                     Level 1                  Level 2                    Level 3
  WHITE
  BLUE          PDRA Result             PDRA result               PDRA-Action, Plan
                OCD Opcen               Orders or                  and Protocols
                 activation               directives from the       Orders or
                Orders                   Vice-Chair for             directives from
                                          Disaster Response          Vice-Chair for
                                                                     Disaster Response

   RED          PDRA Result             RDANA Result              RDANA Result
                OCD OPCEN               Report on the             Report on the
                 Activation               number of                  number of
                Orders or                displaced                  displaced
                 Directives from          population inside          population inside
                 the Vice-Chair           evacuation center          evacuation center
                 for Disaster
                 Response


The following are the key players and actors in the implementation of this concept.

1. Lead Cluster Agency - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)
   through the Disaster Response Assistance and Management Bureau will head and lead the
   coordinating functions of the Cluster. Specifically, the DSWD will do the following for each
   Disaster Phase:
                                                                                               70

  1) During Phase
     a. Shall alert all its QRTs, SWAD Team, PDOs at all levels (CO and FO and other DSWD
        personnel on the ground);
     b. Shall attend to the PDRA core group meeting;
     c. Prepare Predictive Analytics on Humanitarian Assistance;
     d. Ensure that the regional stockpiles are ready for augmentation at the local level (inside
        evacuation center);
     e. Monitoring on the status of all ECs opened including its facilities;
     f. Coordinate with LGU on the number of families evacuated inside ECs;
     g. Ensure that the EC Manager uses DAFAC as basis for master -listing of evacuees;
     h. Coordination with the F/NFI Unit on the sufficient allocation of F/FNIs to evacuees inside
        ECs;
     i. Coordination with EC Managers if there are protection issues inside ECs being reported;
     j. Coordinate the mobilization of rapid assessment teams from the Field Offices; and
     k. Ensure availability of timely and accurate data/reports for information dissemination to
        cluster partners and as basis in provision of augmentation of assistance.

  2) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Assessment of evacuees on their movement to the transitional site;
     b. Listing of evacuees who will be prioritized for moving out to transitional site;
     c. Provision of TA to the LGUs on the construction of transitional site or bunk houses;
     d. Monitor the number of evacuees transferred to transitional site returned to places of
        origin and provided transportation assistance under the Balik-Probinsya Program; and
     e. Conduct PDNA together with concerned agencies.

2. Cluster Members

  A. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (DepEd)

    1) During Disaster Phase
       a. Prepare evacuation center (as to room assignments e.g., lactating mothers, PWDs, male,
          female.);
       b. Coordinate with LGUs on the use of schools as evacuation centers;
       c. Identify temporary learning areas;
       d. Prepare learning activities for school-age children;
       e. Provide safe emergency shelter to affected populations (3 days for short-term up to 15
          days for medium- to long-term);
       f. Assist LGUs/MSWDO to get the detailed profile of evacuees/IDP’s including the needs
          of vulnerable groups especially children (with special needs);
       g. Orient evacuees on schools' rules and regulations as evacuation center;
       h. Monitor evacuation centers;
       i. Conduct learning sessions for school-age children;
       j. Provide psychosocial support activities for affected children; and
       k. Prepare and submit report to DepEd Management.

    2) Post Disaster Phase
       a. Inspection of facilities (Education Facilities Division);
       b. Assess damages to properties;
       c. Coordinate with LGUs in the repair and rehabilitation of schools; and
       d. Oversee the repair and rehabilitation of damaged properties.
                                                                                                71

B. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH)

   1) During: Response Operations Phase
       a. Alert all Response Teams - WASH Teams, MHPSS Team, Rapid Nutrition Assessment
          Team and Infant Feeding/Breast feeding support groups;
       b. Monitor and coordinate status/needs through Center for Health Department (CHD) by
          DOH national;
       c. Ensure stockpiles of key health-related supplies are ready for augmentation;
       d. Ensure inter-operability with the cluster members in the Response Operation Center;
       e. Monitor the status of all affected families in the ECs;
       f. Provide potable water (bottled water, water rationing/trucking, water treatment) by
          LGU and partner;
       g. Install/Construct of toilet facilities (in case of gaps) by LGUs and partners;
       h. Provide hygiene kits and conduct hygiene promotion;
       i. Monitor and coordinate with Center for Health Department (CHD) regarding
          status/needs; and
       j. Deploy MHPSS teams to communities and evacuation centers to provide Psychological
          First Aid (PFA).

   2) Post-Disaster: Early Recovery Phase
           Continues assistance in camp management activities to optimize provision of health
           (public health and medical), nutrition, WASH and MHPSS services;

C. Philippine Red Cross (PRC)

   1) During Disaster Phase
       a. Develop PRC operational action plan based on the needs and gaps identified related to
           CCCM.
       b. Contribute to the cluster in the provision, setup, and management of camp that can
           accommodate 2,000 families with necessary equipment such as tents, wilkhalls (rub
           halls), emergency health & WASH facilities, and food & non-food items as required.
       c. Provision of assistance to target beneficiaries based on needs analysis and available
           resources > food, non-food (including sleeping kits, hygiene kit and tarpaulin), welfare
           (PSP, tracing, & restoration family link), soup kitchen (hot meals on wheels),
           water/sanitation (water treatment and distribution), emergency health station.
       d. Provision of Pre-hospital care for injured and ill persons, ambulance for patient
           transport in.

   2) Post Disaster Phase
       a. Conduct of Post-disaster and needs assessment in coordination with the CCM Cluster
           and its members.
       b. Develop operational action plan for Early Recovery Program.
       c. Conduct of inventory of existing resources.
       d. Prepare and submit end-emergency operation activities, narrative on progress and
           accomplishment, finance, and statistics data.
                                                                                             72

IV. COMMAND AND CONTROL

   A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
      as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

   B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
      (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

     1. Succession of Command:
        a. Chairperson, NDRRMC (S, DND)
        b. Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response (S, DSWD)
        c. CCCM Cluster Lead (DReAMB)
        d. CCCM Cluster Members

     2. Inter-agency Communication System Support
        For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
        utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster
        will be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                  73

Internally Displaced Persons Protection (IDP)
(NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of _____
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

On 08 November 2013, Typhoon Haiyan (locally known as Super Typhoon “Yolanda”) struck the
Philippines. Known as one of the strongest storms to make landfall, it affected several regions, with
VI, VII, and VIII being among the hardest hit, and killed over 6,000 people while displacing millions
of others. It also caused massive damages to public and private infrastructures and properties.
Given the colossal destruction, the Philippine Government called for international assistance for
immediate recovery of the families and communities affected by the disaster.

The institutionalization of the Cluster Approach in the Philippine Disaster Management System and
designated government lead among clusters at the national, regional and provincial levels which
allows the NDRRMC member agencies to coordinate and collaborate in order to establish
awareness and achieve common understanding and common operational picture of respective roles
and functions, capabilities, operational procedures, systems and protocols in responding during
disaster.

The Department of Social Welfare and Development as the government Cluster Lead for IDP
Protection is to put in place effective mechanisms to prevent of sexual violence and to provide
accessible prompt and services during disaster. In the Philippines, the Protection Cluster has two
Areas of Responsibilities (AoRs).

The Child Protection Working Group (CPWG) aims to bring together in one forum child protection
actors and partners operational in areas affected by both natural and human induced disasters and
to facilitate the development and coordination of child protection strategies and responses,
including advocacy with authorities and humanitarian actors as necessary.

The GBVSC (Gender-Based Violence Sub-Cluster) aims to coordinate and support relevant
stakeholders to put in place mechanisms to prevent gender-based violence and provide survivor-
centered and appropriate services to GBV survivors during natural and human induced disasters.

II. OBJECTIVE

     GENERAL. The Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) PROTECTION CLUSTER aims to support
and enhance the Government’s capacity to ensure that protection issues do not arise in emergency
situations and to respond and mitigate the effect of any protection issues that do arise.

    SPECIFIC. The following are the specific objectives of this Cluster:

    1. To ensure timely, appropriate& quality provision of multi-sectoral and survivor-centered
       child protection and gender based violence services in accordance with local, national and
       international guidelines/standards on child protection and gender-based violence;
                                                                                                 74


    2. Establish and maintain appropriate coordination mechanism among all humanitarian
       actors, including coordination of protection inputs, reports, and humanitarian plan, and
       generation of resources;

    3. Ensure that the protection response adequately takes into account the primary
       responsibility of the government to ensure protection of affected persons, by among
       others establishing adequate response mechanism and coordination with the national and
       local authorities;

    4. To advocate to all humanitarian clusters, protection, child protection and gender based
       violence duty bearers, government, private sector, and civil society organization to
       mainstream child protection and gender based violence response in programs, policies,
       and plans;

    5. To strengthen partnerships for complementation and coordinated child protection and
       gender-based violence response through the Regional and Local Inter-Agency Committees
       on Anti-Trafficking and Violence against Women and their Children (IACAT-VAWC) and the
       Local Council for the Protection of Children (LCPC); and

    6. To establish common information, monitoring & reporting systems on child protection and
       gender-based violence, linked to the IDP Protection Cluster (IDPPC)

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS:

On order, The IDP Protection Cluster operations to support and enhance the government’s capacity
to ensure that protection issues do not arise in emergency situations and to respond and mitigate
the effect of any protection issues that do arise inside and outside evacuation center. This will be
accomplished in coordination with the two sub-clusters of the IDP Protection and member
agencies.



                    GBV Reporting and Referral Flowchart
                               Department of Social
                                    Welfare &
                               Development (DSWD)
                                  Regional Office                  Police


                                 Provincial Social          Concerned Barangay
                                    Welfare &                    Official
                                  Development
                                 Office (PSWDO)
          GBV Sub-Cluster                                      Health Service
                                                                 Provider
                             Municipal Social Welfare
                              & Development Office
                                   (MSWDO)                     Independent
                                                              Service Provider
                              HW shall file an incident
                               report if survivor gives
                                       consent             HW shall refer the case


                               Humanitarian Worker          If survivor does not
                                (HW) learns of GBV         want an incident report
                                 incident in IDP site                filed
                                                                                                              75

        Flowchart of reporting for children in need of special protection
I. Who are CNSP?        II. Who Can Report?              III. Report Immediately to:       IV. Services
Category of children    Any of the following
in need of Special      person who learns the              Nearest LSWO
Protection              facts or circumstances that
                        give rise to the belief that a
1. Child Abuse
                        child is in need of special        DSWD
2. Children in
    conflict with the   protection may report the                                      Possible
    law                 name, either orally or in                                      Services/interventions:
3. Children with        writing:
    disabilities                                                                       1. Temporary
4. Child Laborers       1. Offended child                                                 shelter/protective
5. Street children      2. Parent//s                                                      custody
6. Children             3. Relatives                                                   2. Health/Medical
    Affected by                                            Nearest PNP                    Services
                        4. Barangay officials
    Armed Conflict      5. Teacher/School                                              3. Education
7. Displaced                personnel                                                  4. Rehabilitation
    children            6. Faith based worker                                          5. Diversion
8. IP children          7. NGO worker                                                  6. Spiritual Services
9. Muslim children      8. Concerned citizen                                           7. Parent Effectiveness
                                                           NBI
10. Dependent,          9. Anygovernment                                                  Services
    Abandoned               officials and employees
11. Children            10. The Head of any public
    affected and            or private hospital,
    living with HIV                                        Barangay/or BCPC
                            medical      clinic    and
                            similar       institutions
                            including NGOs as well
                            as      the      attending
                            physician and nurse            Commission on
                        11. Friends/peers                  Human Rights


                                                           DOJ Help Desk

                                                                                       End Goal-Family and
                                                                                       community
                                                           DOH hospitals/Child         Reintegration when
                                                           Protection Unit             appropriate/possible




                                                           Licensed NGO




                                                           Faith Based
                                                           Organization
                                                                                                  76




1. Lead Agency: DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)

2. Member Agencies:

  a.   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH)
  b.   DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DILG)
  c.   PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) - Women and Children Protection Center (WCPC)
  d.   National Inter-Agency Council on Anti-Trafficking and Violence Against Women and Children
       (IACAT and IAC-VAWC Members)

  A. Roles and Responsibilities:

       1) DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)
         a. Coordinate with member agencies for activation of response operation;
         b. Establish information systems for measuring emergency Child Protection and Gender
            Base Violence needs in coordination with member agency;
         c. Ensuring availability of age/sex disaggregated data of all children, women, lactating
            mothers, PWD and elderly inside and outside evacuation centers in coordination with
            member agencies;
         d. Ensure availability of timely and accurate data/reports for information dissemination to
            cluster partners and as basis in provision of augmentation of assistance;
         e. Shall coordinate for proper referral to LCAT Desks and/or VAWC desks or other existing
            women and child protection structures.
         f. Provide capacity-building on Child Protection and Gender Based Violence in
            Emergencies, including coordination; and
         g. Developing appropriate programmers, strategies, as necessary, to address protection
            and psychosocial needs of affected children and women.

       2) DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH)

         a. Shall provide health, medical and nutritional needs of IDP in the evacuation center
            including psychosocial interventions especially for children in different stages of
            development, women, persons with disability and elderly;
         b. Shall assist and coordinate with other member agency through the Gender Based
            Violence/Child Protection sub-cluster in reporting sexual violence cases; and
         c. Operationalization of Minimum Initial Services Package for Sexual Reproductive Health
            in affected areas


       3) DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DILG)

           Shall ensure the organization and functionality of the Local Council for the Protection of
           Children (LCPC)

       4) PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) -Women and Children Protection Center

           Shall monitor and ensure safety, security and protect the affected IDPs to all forms of
           violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation in-coordination with the member agencies.
                                                                                                   77


  5) PHILIPPINE RED CROSS (PRC)
         a) Pre Disaster: Preparation Phase
           a. Assess chapter preparedness and status of all assets and resources including
              manpower, supplies, equipment and tools, and funds from chapters in
              preparation for resource prepositioning.
           b. Mobilization and deployment of assessment teams to assist in the information
              gathering of status in the field through the rapid damage assessment and needs
              analysis through its chapters.
           c. Develop overall emergency response action plan of PRC.

          b) During: Disaster Phase
            a. Assist in the provision of relief supplies such as food (relief goods, hot meals, etc.)
               and non-food items (hygiene kits, dignity kits, emergency shelter kits etc.) to
               augment in the relief operation activities in coordination with the lead cluster
               and all its members.
            b. Mobilize the logistical support required to augment response capacity and/or
               field base operations managed by the PRC through its chapters.
            c. Assist in the information gathering of affected population through its chapter
               setup of welfare desks and conduct tracing through restoring family link (RFL) in
               evacuation centers coordination with LGU.
            d. Support the NDRRMC Operation Center in the gathering and collation of disaster
               reports and statistics.
            e. Ensure coordination of activities of PRC of its disaster operation at NHQ, chapter,
               and other field operation level to the cluster.

          c) Post Disaster Phase
            a. Provide updates and/or situational report to the NDRRMC thru F/NFI Cluster.
            b. Continuous monitoring and coordination on the needs and gaps along with the
               members of the cluster.


    6) Other NGOs working for the Protection of Women and Children



          Participate in Internally Displaced Persons Protection Cluster meetings, assessments,
          and provision of services


IV. COMMAND AND CONTROL

  A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
     as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

  B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
     (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

     1. Succession of Command:

       a. Chairperson, NDRRMC (S, DND)
       b. Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response ( DSWD)
       c. IDP Protection Cluster Lead (DREAMB)
       d. IDP Protection Cluster Members
                                                                                       78

2. Interagency Communication System Support

  For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
  utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will
  be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                  79

    Food and Non-Food Items Cluster Operations Protocol
    (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of _____
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

During disaster incidents, it is common sight for affected communities to be cut-off from their
regular supply of food and the means to prepare their daily meals. The operations of the Food and
Non-Food Items Cluster (FNI Cluster) has focused on providing the affected families with the
needed sustenance and other daily requirements that they need to maintain health and hygiene.

II. OBJECTIVE:

The Food and Non-Food Items Cluster aims is to provide food that are nutritious, age-appropriate
and are socially and culturally acceptable to affected population and non-food items to the affected
population during the emergency response phase in the short-term, and to restore at least the pre-
disaster level of food security in the affected areas in the long-term.

Specifically, the Cluster aims:

   a. To ensure availability of family food packs, ready-to-eat food, and bottled drinking water and
      also non-food item such as sleeping gears, family clothing packs, dignity kits, kitchen kits,
      and shelter kits stockpiled at all levels;
   b. To undertake the coordinated provision of food and non-food assistance to the affected
      families; and
   c. Regularly monitor, in coordination with Nutrition Cluster as a part of Health Cluster, the
      nutritional status (include nutritional content, social and cultural acceptability anywhere in
      the food/non-food items) of the affected population, identify gaps in the provision of food
      assistance, and formulate strategic interventions to address the gaps.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATION:

On orders, the FNI Cluster shall augment the resources of the affected Local Government Units
(City/Municipal/Province) during the pre-disaster, during disaster and post disaster phases. LGUs
must have prepositioned resources that will be distributed first to the affected population to ensure
that the IDPs are provided with the needed food and non-food items.

The Cluster Lead shall coordinate, allocate, orchestrate and monitor the delivery of food and non-
food items to the affected families and communities.

All members of the FNI Cluster shall coordinate their relief distribution / augmentation with the
Cluster Lead.
                                                                                                      80

The FNI Cluster will follow the cluster approach taking into account that the direction of the
operations will be guided on the information provided at the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Councils (LDRRMCs).

The LDRRMCs should also establish a system of reporting for the inventory of available resources at
their disposal and will only submit and request to the next higher level of government for
augmentation of required resources.

All Clusters will conduct post disaster assessment of cluster operations to identify good practices
and areas for improvement.

Alert Level and Level of Response


    Alert Level                                     Response Level
                            Level 1                  Level 2                  Level 3
      White                    -                         -                       -
      Blue            Agency directives       -PDRA result            -PDRA-APP
                                              -Directives from the
                                              Cluster Lead.
       Red            Agency directives       -PDRA result            -PDRA result
                                              -Activation of ECs      -RDANA result
                                              -Report on              -Massive displacement of
                                              displacement of         population
                                              population              -Escalation in the number
                                                                      of ECs-opened
                                                                      -Number of casualties
                                                                      arises.


The following are the key players and actors in the implementation of this concept:

1. Lead Agency: DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)

2. Member Agencies: Government Agencies

  a. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH) -NATIONAL NUTRITION COUNCIL
  b. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (DA) – NATIONAL FOOD AUTHORITY
  c. OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)

  A. Roles and Responsibilities:

      1)     DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD) through the
             Disaster Response Assistance and Management Bureau will head and lead the
             coordinating functions of the Cluster. Specifically, the DSWD will do the following for
             each Disaster Phase:

             a) During Disaster Phase
                a. Activate and deploy Quick Response Teams;
                b. Activate and deploy pool of volunteers for repacking, delivery of goods,
                   management of donations and monitoring and distribution of food and non-food
                   items;
                                                                                          81

       c. Activate 24/7 operation of Disaster Response Operations and Monitoring and
          Information Center (DROMIC) at Central Office and Field Offices;
       d. Continue disaster response monitoring and coordination to mobilize
          instrumentalities and entities of the LGUs, CSOs and private groups and organize
          volunteers for response;
       e. Provide emergency relief (food and non-food items) inside and outside
          evacuation center;
       f. Determine logistical requirements for F and FNI (warehouse and transport),
          coordinate with Logistic Cluster and other humanitarian and commercial
          partners;
       g. Establish the One Stop Shop (OSS) in coordination with BOC and DOF;
       h. Coordinate with internal and external donor/donation agencies for their
          capacities taking into consideration occurring disaster situations;
       i. Allocate Quick Response Fund (QRF) to the Field Office level. Work and financial
          planning for additional allocation of QRF for relief augmentation and other
          operational expenses;
       j. Participate in the conduct of Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis,
          specifically on need for food requirement as basis for response; and
       k. Provision of Disaster Assistance Family Access Card (DAFAC) to be facilitate by
          the LGUs on-time, frequency and type of assistance provided to disaster victims.

   b) Post-Disaster Phase
      a. Participate in the conduct of PDNA w/ other partner agencies;
      b. Develop a post-distribution monitoring system. Evaluation of the quality,
         sufficiency, effectiveness and timeliness of distributions that help to improve the
         overall distribution system and approach;
      c. Establish complaints mechanisms, so camp residents can ensure a way to verify
         entitlements and services. In case of fraud, theft or abuse, camp
         residents/families must be able to voice their complaints and know that lead
         and coordinating agency including service providers will take action;
      d. Shall provide “Pabaon Package” (provision of food packs) to those who wants to
         go back to their respective places of origin; and
      e. Shall provide continuing relief assistance when needed.

The roles and responsibilities of the Support Agencies shall be as follows:

2) NATIONAL FOOD AUTHORITY (NFA)

  a) During Disaster Phase
     a. Position/transfer rice stocks to areas particularly with deficit and those identified
        as calamity prone areas;
     b. Coordinates with LGUs nationwide and pursue advocacy on NFA programs,
        availability of rice security stocks and encourage LGUs to enter into a
        Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) on credit sales prior to calamities;
     c. Shall alert available personnel and resources for activities for the supply of NFA
        Rice;
     d. Continue OPCEN operations;
     e. Closely coordinate/facilitate the requests of the DSWD and other relief and
        concerned government and private entities on the rice requirements; and
     f. Issues/delivers rice stocks as requested by DSWD on payment/submission of
        necessary documents.
                                                                                          82

   b) Post Disaster Phase
      a. Monitors the supply and demand, and prices of rice and extent of damages;
      b. Deploys rolling stores and tap/accredit rice retailers in the affected areas to
         sustain/stabilize the supply and prices of rice; and
      c. Coordinates/facilitates the requests of DSWD on their rice requirements.

3) ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP)

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Shall coordinate with the DSWD on the volunteers needed for the repacking of
         family food packs at the DSWD warehouses and other identified repacking
         centers.
      b. Shall take necessary actions in response to the requests from LGUs and the cluster
         through NDRRMC/OCD;
      c. Shall coordinate with the DSWD on the volunteers needed for the continuous
         repacking of family food packs at the DSWD warehouses; and
      d. Shall provide the necessary capability to assist in the transport, delivery, and
         security requirements of the affected LGUs, cluster members through NDRRMC.

   b) Post Disaster Phase
       Shall provide personnel, transportation and other support requirements for the
       continuous relief assistance to the affected population.

4) DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH) - National Nutrition Council

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Update capacity maps in coordination with the National and Local Nutrition
         Clusters and coordinate actions needed to ensure capacity to provide nutrition
         response in areas threatened by the event; and
      b. Advise the local nutrition clusters to monitor the incident and put on stand-by,
         breastfeeding support groups and supplies needed for the response, also to
         retrieve pre-event data on the nutritional status of children in areas that have
         great risk of the incoming disaster/emergency
      c. Monitor and provide technical support to actions of local nutrition clusters in
         supporting, promoting, and protecting the nutritional status of vulnerable
         populations including but not limited to pregnant women, lactating women, and
         mothers with infants and young children (6-23 months old), including provision of
         mother-baby sanctuary and monitoring compliance to the Milk Code and act
         accordingly;
      d. Coordinate the Nutrition Cluster and mobilize the following from members and
         partners of the National Nutrition Cluster and local nutrition clusters;

            i.   Nutrition logistics (e.g. vitamin A capsules, multiple micronutrient powder,
                 iron-folic acid supplements, ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF), ready-to-
                 use supplementary food (RUSF), human milk, mid-upper arm circumference
                 or mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) tapes, weighing scales, height
                 board, breastfeeding kit, Child Growth Standards (CGS) reference tables;
           ii.   Conduct of general/blanket and targeted supplementary feeding as needed;
          iii.   Management of cases of severe and moderate acute malnutrition;
          iv.    Mobilization of nutrition assessment teams, infant feeding, and
                 breastfeeding support groups to provide skilled infant and young child
                 feeding counseling and support to mothers of infants 0-23 months old; and
           v.    Active monitoring and timely report of Milk Code violations
                                                                                                83


              e. Participate in Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment; and
              f. Prepare reports as may be needed

            b) Post Disaster Phase
               a. Prepare report of the response of the Nutrition Cluster (national and local)
               b. Coordinate the conduct of follow-up nutrition assessments in affected areas
               c. Coordinate the continued provision of services as may be needed, e.g. infant and
                  young child feeding, micronutrient supplementation, and management of acute
                  malnutrition; and
               d. Participate in the Post Damage and Needs Assessment

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

  A.     The DSWD as Cluster Lead will coordinate all movement of food and non-food items
       including those coming from other public or private organizations using the support of the
       Logistics Cluster; and

  B. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
     internal personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the
     NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.

V. COMMAND AND CONTROL

  A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
     as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

  B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
     (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

        1. Succession of Command:
           a. Chairperson, NDRRMC (S, DND)
           b. Vice-Chairperson for Disaster Response (S, DSWD)
           c. F/NFI Cluster Lead (DReAMB)
           d. F/NFI Cluster Members

        2. Interagency Communication System Support
           For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
           utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster
           will be activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                    84

   Logistics Cluster Operations Protocol
   (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: _______ of _______
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

In anticipation of any disaster or during and post disaster, the Logistic Cluster shall provide
assistance to other clusters for their logistical requirements.

II. OBJECTIVES

To provide an efficient and effective strategic emergency logistics services all clusters deployed by
the National Response Cluster and encourage regular info-sharing among all stakeholders and
other partners on emergency road network, status of critical infrastructure/lifelines, etc. The
Cluster also formulates, updates, implements and monitors logistical policies, plans, programs and
procedures that will harmonize the activities of each cluster.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On activation, the Logistics Cluster shall provide an efficient and effective strategic emergency
logistics services for all clusters deployed by the National Response Cluster in disaster affected
areas in terms of mobility, warehousing, and supplies and inventory management.

The cluster shall organize four (4) sub-clusters, namely:

   a. Transportation (land, sea, and air) – provide mobility assets for all cluster operations;
   b. Warehousing – provide space for the storage and safekeeping of relief goods, supplies,
      materials and equipment of the different clusters;
   c. Supplies and Inventory – provide fuel, generators, and other emergency resources for
      cluster operations. Further, ensure the tracking of deployed items; and
   d. Services – provide road clearing operations including the restoration and maintenance of
      utilities such as electricity and water supplies

The Cluster will be activated by the Vice Chairperson for Response when necessary. Upon
activation, all cluster member agencies and identified partners shall ensure their attendance in
cluster meetings and provide the Cluster Lead with a list of available assets with its corresponding
capacity that can be utilized by all the cluster to support the activities of the other clusters during
disaster operations.
The Logistics Cluster takes into account that the direction of the operations will be based on the
information and requests provided by the other clusters, Vice Chair for Response, and the Local
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Councils of affected areas. The operation is divided into
two (2) phases: During disaster and Post disaster.

The Office of Civil Defense (OCD) as the Cluster Lead shall head the cluster operations, undertake all
major coordinating functions.
                                                                                                85


All Clusters requesting for logistical support shall communicate their requests to the Cluster Lead
through the NDRRMC OpCen. The designated focal persons of the Logistics Cluster shall:

   A. Determine the prioritization and identify assets to be used;
   B. Coordinate with cluster member agencies the availability and mobilization of appropriate
      logistics assets;
   C. Facilitate administrative requirements for the mobilization and transport of resources;
   D. Provide feedback to requesting agency;
   E. Monitor/track deployed assets; and
   F. Prepare status reports on deployed resources.

For Transportation requests:
    A. Requesting agency shall submit to the Cluster Lead a written request indicating detailed
       items with corresponding specifications (weight, volume, dimension) including the name
       and contact numbers of the receiving party/ies;
    B. Prioritization shall be determined by the Cluster Lead based on the requirements in the
       affected area and/or based on the result of initial assessments and requests from the LGUs;
    C. It shall be the prime responsibility of the requesting party to secure and accompany their
       goods until its transport to the area and endorsed to the receiving party; and
    D. The proposed use of assets that will be tapped for logistics operations are:
       1. Government
       2. Any non-government entity
       3. Commercial Services (with payment or without cost on the part of the government)

For Warehousing:
    A. The Cluster Members shall provide the Cluster Lead with a list of available warehouses and
       its load capacity for the use of the Cluster during Disaster.
    B. The Cluster will coordinate all available warehouses for use of all DRMMC members for
       prepositioning and augmentation of needed resources during disaster.

1. Lead Cluster Agency: OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)

  The Office of Civil Defense (OCD), through the Logistics, Interoperability and Force Management
  Division, will lead the cluster and perform the following functions:

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Attend pre-deployment meetings;
      b. Inventory of resources (local and national) to identify gaps;
      c. Positioning of assets/resources;
      d. Receive and facilitate request for logistical support;
      e. Coordinate the transport of assistance with concerned agencies;
      f. Provide feedback to requesting DRRMCs/organizations;
      g. Institute a tracking system of all HA/DR assistance provided, including international
         donations for equipment and coordination;
      h. Identify prioritization of aid cargo as "must load";
      i. Orchestrate information sharing;
      j. Confirmation of Traffic Status: Contact and confirm the following status of transport
         conditions:
         - DPWH and OCDRCs Concerned: Roads and Bridges Condition/Road Network.
         - ATO, Concerned Airline Companies: Domestic Flight Cancellation
         - NAIA, Concerned Airline Companies: International Flight Cancellation
         - PCG, Concerned Shipping Companies: Sea Transportation/Voyage Suspension
                                                                                                86

        - MRT, LRT, DOTC: Train Services Suspension
        - PNCC, DOTC: NLEX and SLEX Traffic Flow
      k. In coordination with member agencies, recommend the transport of food, equipment,
         and personnel from supply points to destination mode;
      l. Coordinate with the IHAC for the provision of logistical support from the other countries,
         UN, ASEAN, and international organizations;
      m. Ensure the constant gathering of official reports and significant data; and
      n. Update assessment of roads, warehouses stocks, transport capacities to, from and within
         the affected areas.

   b) Post Disaster Phase
      a. Coordinate and request relevant agencies to provide Transportation Support when it is
         considered necessary and/or requested by local governments of affected areas;
      b. Coordinate the usage of hauling and delivery means for transport of such goods to
         affected areas based on the direction of N/RDRRMC;
      c. Consolidate reports and prepare cluster report;
      d. Update assessments of roads, warehouses, transport capacities to and from, and
         available logistic services;
      e. Deploy additional food and non-food items in disaster affected areas in coordination with
         OCDRCs and DSWD;
      f. Coordinate with concerned agencies the return of deployed resources (equipment &
         human resource);
      g. Provide data to PDNA Team when necessary; and
      h. Engage private agencies for transport assistance.

2. Cluster Member Agencies

A. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD) through the Disaster
   Response Management Bureau (DReAMB) will perform the following tasks for each Disaster
   Phase:

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Inform the OCD as head of Cluster the current inventory at DSWD NROC and its Regional
         Warehouses;
      b. Inform the OCD of the transportation capabilities (number of trucks available) of DSWD
         to transport Food and NFI as well as its manpower compliments;
      c. Inform the Cluster Head for the requirement of additional transportation assets and
         manpower for the loading and unloading of supplies;
      d. Augment FNI and supplies of Camp Management to the affected areas;
      e. Employ tracking system for all food and non-food items sent and received by DSWD;
      f. Identify needs for logistic support; and
      g. Coordinate logistical requirements/request for transport to the Cluster Lead.

   b) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Replenish FNI inventories; and
     b. Provide additional augmentation of FNI to the affected areas.

 B. PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) through the Logistics Support Service) will perform
    the following tasks for each Disaster Phase:

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Preparation for dispatch of General Dispatch Vehicles (GDVs);
      b. Coordinate with concerned agencies for safe route of GDVs;
                                                                                                   87

      c. Identify fuel depot for safe re-fuelling of GDVs (efficient); and

      d. Coordinate with line units and concerned agencies re passable route for General Dispatch
          Vehicles (GDV); and
      e. Coordinate adjacent line units re availability of necessary equipment.

   b) Post Disaster Phase
         Line units remove obstacles/debris from roads in coordination with LGUs, DPWH, AFP

C. ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP) through the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for
   Logistics, OJ4 will perform the following tasks for each Disaster Phase:

  a) During Disaster Phase:
     a. Participate in joint logistics cluster meetings;
     b. Conduct inventory of troops and organizational equipment and supplies (firepower,
        mobility, quartermaster, POL, medical and other items) for HADR support operations;
     c. Prepare and submit inventory of mobility (air, land, sea) and other logistical assets
        (temporary shelter tents, engineering assets, etc.);
     d. Strengthen camp/base facilities to improve disaster resilience;
     e. Preposition respective assets, POL and reserve requirements;
     f. Provide transportation assets (air, land, sea) in coordination with the Major Services (PA,
        PAF, and PN) to deliver humanitarian assistance in disaster affected areas;
     g. Provide warehousing/storage of supplies and other HADR items as required in
        coordination with the DSWD for the repacking of goods; and
     h. Coordinate adjacent line units re availability of necessary equipment.

  b) Post Disaster Phase:
     a. Sustain logistics support to AFP units conducting limited transportation, medical and
        manpower support to the early recovery activities as required by the National
        government;
     b. Provide engineering equipment to support DPWH in road-clearing operations if
        necessary; and
     c. Provide transportation support for the return of deployed assets.

D. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HIGHWAYS (DPWH)

  a) During Disaster
     a. Assist in clearing of roads and identification of alternate routes for response operations.;
        and
     b. Tap partners in the use of assets for the provision of an alternate road network going to
        and from the affected areas to facilitate unhampered transportation of goods and
        personnel.

  b) Post Disaster
     a. Provide logistical support in hauling and delivery of goods/commodities to affected areas;
     b. Remove obstacle and urgently rehabilitate the affected national roads;
     c. Exchange information on damage condition of infrastructure facilities to LGUs, OCD,
        NDRRMC
     d. Report national roads and bridges and other infrastructure facilities’ damage condition
        and rehabilitation status to DRMMCs;
     e. Be responsible for distributing traffic information to road users, if traffic is restricted in
        national roads; and
                                                                                                 88

        f. Conduct Post Disaster Needs Assessment and develop plans for a build back better
           infrastructure.

E. PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD (PCG)

     a) During Disaster Phase
       a. Alert all PCG Districts/Stations/Detachments and floating units in the possible area of
          disaster;
       b. Alert/activate Deployable Response Groups (DRGs) with their equipment;
       c. Coordinate with DRRMC; and
       d. PCG shall contribute to emergency transportation by operating their vessels and aircraft
          based on needs and requests from DRRMC and affected Local Governments.

     b) Post-Disaster Phase
       a. Support the urgent rehabilitation activities such as removing obstacles, transporting,
          relocating residents, and transporting basic commodities needed under emergency in
          coordination with DRRMCs;
       b. Provide assets for clearing operation of sediments or any hazard to ensure safe navigation
          within coastal areas and passage ways;
       c. Evaluate and assess the effectiveness and sufficiency of deployed assets during the
          emergency response;
       d. Evaluate the concept of operations if it needs improvements or rectification; and
       e. Coordinate with NDRRMC and LGU prior pull-out of deployed/utilized assets.

F.      BUREAU OF FIRE PROTECTION (BFP) through the Logistics & Engineering Division,
     Directorate for Logistics will perform the following tasks for each Disaster Phase:

     a) Pre Disaster
        a. Alert stations prior to disaster – OPLAN PAGHALASA
        b. Shall direct emergency transport activities to its lower offices based on needs and
           requests from NDRRMC and affected local governments.

     b) Post Disaster Phase
         Provide assets for clearing operations.

G. PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY (PPA)

     a. Ensure the operation of ports that may be used for the transportation of humanitarian
        assistance to a disaster affected areas;
     b. Provide the cluster with reports on the status of ports;
     c. Coordinate with shipping companies for the provision of transportation support;
     d. Ensure that responders are given priority in transport ; and
     e. Provide urgent rehabilitation of ports, when needed.

H. AIRPORT AUTHORITIES (CAAP, MIAA, MCIAA, and OTHERS)

     a. Responsible for the confirmation of Flight Cancellation: Concerned Airline Companies shall
        Confirm International Flight Cancellation and report it to DRRMC-OpCens; and
     b. Closely and mutually correspond, and implement effective emergency rehabilitation of
        facilities under their jurisdiction, as needed.
                                                                                               89

I. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (DOTr)

  a) During Disaster Phase
     a. Confirmation of Train Service Suspension: DOTr together with MRT and LRT corporations
        shall confirm Train Service Suspension and report it to DRRMC-OpCens;
     b. Confirmation of Status of NLEX and SLEX Traffic Flow: DOTr together with PNCC shall
        confirm status of NLEX and SLEX Traffic Flow and report it to DRRMC-OpCens;
     c. Coordinate supporting activities of national and local governmental entities, and
        voluntary organizations for the provision of civil transportation when required;
     d. Comprehensively and proactively implement emergency transport by utilizing all means
        by land, sea, and air through the Coordination by N/RDRRMCs (OCD); and
     e. Coordinate and implement, as required, emergency-related response functions to be
        performed under the power of DOTr, including the prioritization and/or allocation of civil
        transportation capacity, air and marine traffic control for search and rescue, hazardous
        material containment response, and damage assessment.

  b) Post Disaster
     a. Ensure the priority usage of hauling and delivery means for transport of such goods to
        affected areas;
     b. Closely and mutually implement effective emergency rehabilitation for transportation
        facilities, such as Airports which are damaged by disaster together with airport managing
        bodies (MIAA and other airport offices);
     c. Be responsible for promptly assessing and collecting information on railway damage
        including LRT/MRT, and report it to NDRRMC and lower related DRMMCs, and request
        urgent rehabilitation to railway corporations; and
     d. Provide technical assistance to any government entities in determining the most viable
        transportation networks to, from, and within the disaster area, as well as alternate means
        to move people and goods within the area affected by the disaster.

J. Department of Energy (DOE)
     The DOE through its Disaster Risk Reduction & Control Management Group, chaired by the
     DOE Undersecretary will lead and perform the following functions, in coordination with the
     OCD:

  a) During Disaster Phase
     a. Preparation/Coordination with concerned DOE bureaus/services and attached agencies
        (National Power Corporation [NPC], National Electrification Administration [NEA],
        /National Transmission Corporation [TransCo], and Philippines National Oil Company
        [PNOC] on various logistics needed, i.e., manpower/technical expertise (for the power
        plant, grid/ distribution lines/tower, fuel/oil/lubricants [FOL], etc.);
     b. Submit the following lists (with a MOA/MOU, if applicable):
         - Service providers on FOL (in coordination with NPC, PNOC, gasoline stations);
         - Electric Cooperatives [ECs] (in coordination with NEA, TransCo); and
         - Private companies (with Philippine Institute of Petroleum [PIP], Renewable Energy
            contractors on solar energy, genset, if needed);
     c. Assessment of the area and evaluation in coordination with the concerned affected LGU
        (i.e., no. of households, extent of the damage, and needed in-flux of resources);
     d. Way forward (need for recommendation, what to be immediately done, restoration of
        power and energy); and
     e. Regular conduct of status report updating
                                                                                                 90

  b) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Conduct of Post Disaster Needs Assessment [PDNA]; and
     b. Submit Completion Report

K. Volunteer and Private Groups acknowledged by NDRRMC

   Provide necessary transportation assets, supplies and warehouses to support the disaster
   management operations of the NDRRMC.


IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

   A. The OCD as Cluster Lead will coordinate all support and requirements of response
      committee in their activities to augment the requirements at the affected areas during
      disasters; and

   B. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their respective
      internal personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through the
      NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.


IV. COMMAND AND CONTROL

   A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and based their actions
      as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 1021, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

   B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
      (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

       1. Succession of Command:

          a. Logistics Cluster Lead (OCD-Logistics, Interoperability and Force Management Div)
          b. OJ4, AFP
          c. Logistics Cluster Members

       2. Interagency Communication System Support

          For the entire duration of the operations, the existing means of communications shall be
utilized whatever is applicable. However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will be
activated once communication is cut-off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                  91

   Education Cluster Operations Protocol
   (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: _____ of ______
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

The occurrence of earthquake and/or tsunami has significant effects to the education sector.
Suspension of classes, as an immediate and initial response, is announced to prevent exposure of
learners to the impact of these disasters. The Education Cluster is one of the clusters responding to
the needs of affected learners and schools during earthquake and tsunami disasters. The safety of
students and personnel during these hazards, without early warning, is the top priority of the
Education Cluster.

II. OBJECTIVE

The Education Cluster aims to ensure safety of learners and personnel. It also aims to provide
continued access to quality education to all affected learners. Specifically, the cluster will:

   a)   Prepare field offices and schools by issuing alerts and warnings based on PHIVOLCS
        bulletins and/or local issuances;
   b)   Conduct impact and needs assessment on affected teaching and non-teaching personnel,
        learners, and education resources;
   c)   Provide the required temporary learning spaces, teaching and learning materials to allow
        for resumption of classes and education service delivery;
   d)   Promote and activate the use of alternative delivery modes of learning in affected areas;
   e)   Coordinate the provision of psychosocial support and services to both learners and
        personnel with concerned agencies; and
   f)   Mobilize resources to facilitate delivery of other relevant assistance to affected teaching
        and non-teaching personnel.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On orders, the Education Cluster will ensure immediate access of all children in the affected areas
to quality education in a safe and secure environment and ensure that all needs related to
emergency education services are addressed as part of the overall response of the cluster.

This will be accomplished through coordination with cluster members such as Technical Education
and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), Local and
International Non-Government Organizations, Civil Society Organizations, Individual and Private
Corporate Partners, and Inter-cluster coordination and response operation. The cluster lead
agency, Department of Education (DepEd) will convene the member agencies to provide updates
and discuss available resources of each member agencies for prepositioning that will be used in
providing such emergency education services. This includes the provision of technical support and
services to affected areas.
                                                                                                92

In the event of escalation and need for international assistance to augment national capacities and
resources, the coordination shall be done through the Philippine International Humanitarian
Assistance Cluster (PIHAC) and Education Cluster co-leads namely, Save the Children and United
Nations Children Fund (UNICEF).

Composition: The Education Cluster shall be composed of the following agencies:

1. Lead Agency: DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (DepEd)

2. Member Agencies:
   i. Commission on Higher Education (CHED)
   ii. Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA)
   iii. Local and International Non-Government Organizations, and Civil Society Organizations
   iv. Individual and Corporate Private Partners

The roles and responsibilities of the Lead Agency shall be as follows:

1. Cluster Lead Agency: DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (DepEd) through the Disaster Risk
   Reduction and Management Service (DRRMS) will lead the coordinating functions of the
   Cluster. Specifically, DepEd will do the following for each Disaster Phase:

   a) During Disaster Phase
      a. Issue initial alerts and warnings as projected by relevant agencies (DOST-PHIVOLCS and
         MGB, NDRRMC) to Field Offices and Education Cluster Members;
      b. Attend pre-deployment Meetings;
      c. Prepare baseline reports of projected affected areas (e.g. enrolment, classrooms, and
         personnel);
      d. Reinforce alerts issued to field offices and education cluster members as may be
         appropriate upon advice made by NDRRMC;
      e. Enforce the strict implementation of school safety and preparedness protocols, such as
         ensuring protection of education property;
      f. Provide advisory on preemptive evacuation, if necessary;
      g. Project the possible impact of the impending threat to the following: safety of learners
         and personnel, destruction of properties, and disruption of educational services;
      h. Adhere to the policies on suspension of classes based on EO 66 (s. 2012). If learners and
         personnel are already in school upon suspension, it should consider their safety before
         allowing them to leave the school premises;
      i. Prepare for the possible activation of Emergency Operation Centers (EOC);
      j. Convene the Education Cluster for response operations;
      k. Activate EOC at concerned levels;
      l. Convene the Education Cluster;
      m. Attend PDRA and response coordination meetings;
      n. Closely coordinate with relevant government agencies (NDRRMC, OCD, DOST-PAGASA,
         PHIVOLCS, DSWD, DOH, among others) to appropriately inform field offices on the
         possible occurrence of related events;
      o. Track key officials and personnel;
      p. Monitor the status of office operations in affected divisions and regions;
      q. Conduct rapid assessment to gather data on impact to education and generate reports;
      r. Monitor school operations such as class suspensions and schools used as Evacuation
         Center;
      s. Submit reports to Management for appropriate and immediate action from concerned
         offices;
                                                                                                93

      t.  Disseminate situation reports to NDRRMC, Inter-Cluster, Education Cluster, and field
          offices affected;
      u. Monitor possible escalation of situation that may aggravate impact on learners,
          personnel, and properties;
      v. Prepare for the deployment/provision of resources (i.e. personnel, learning materials,
          support for Temporary Learning Spaces (TLS), psychosocial support and services);
      w. Coordinate with Health Cluster for the provision of health services and psychosocial
          support to affected learners and personnel;
      x. Coordinate with Camp Coordination and Camp Management (CCCM) for the schools used
          as evacuation center; and
      y. Coordinate with Search Rescue and Retrieval (SRR) Cluster for reports related to SRR of
          affected learners and personnel, if necessary;
      z. Coordinate with Law and Order (LAO) Cluster to provide necessary security to affected
          schools and local EOC, if necessary; and
      aa. Perform other tasks as directed.

   b) Post Disaster Phase
      a. Continuous tracking of key officials and personnel;
      b. Monitor school operations such as class suspensions and resumption, and schools used
         as Evacuation Center and decampment;
      c. Establish temporary learning spaces in affected schools and schools used as evacuation
         centers;
      d. Monitor the availability of areas for temporary learning spaces in affected schools;
      e. Mobilize appropriate educational interventions such as, but not limited to, the following:
         - Psycho-social support and services;
         - Teaching and learning materials;
         - Conduct of life skill education and alternative delivery modes;
         - School clean-up;
         - Emergency feeding programs;
         - Minor repairs of school facilities; and
         - Life-saving supplies for education (health, nutrition, protection).
      f. Mobilize and facilitate appropriate personnel assistance;
      g. Attend NDRRMC coordination meetings;
      h. Conduct Education Cluster meetings;
      i. Conduct Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) in coordination with other cluster
         members;
      j. Coordinate with Logistics Cluster to transport education supplies and services;
      k. Coordinate with Health Cluster for the provision of health services and psychosocial
         support to affected learners and personnel;
      l. Coordinate with Camp Coordination and Camp Management (CCCM) for the schools used
         as evacuation center;
      m. Coordinate with Law and Order (LAO) Cluster to provide necessary security to affected
         schools and local EOC, if necessary;
      n. Coordinate with Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster (IHAC) for the
         education services and support, if necessary; and
      o. Perform other tasks as directed.

The roles and responsibilities of the Member Agencies and Organizations shall be as follows:
                                                                                              94

2. Cluster Member Agencies and Organizations

  a) During Disaster Phase
     a. Assist the Lead Agency in communicating alerts and warnings to field offices and schools;
     b. Position resources for the projected impact to schools;
     c. Participate in Education Cluster meetings;
     d. Assist in the tracking of key officials and personnel and monitoring of field office and
        school operations;
     e. Participate in Education Cluster meetings; and
     f. Share monitoring and assessment result at the cluster level

  b) Post Disaster Phase
     a. Coordinate with the Lead Agency on the conduct of PDNA;
     b. Participate in Education Cluster meetings;
     c. Assist in the continuous tracking of personnel and students;
     d. Assist the establishment of temporary learning spaces;
     e. Mobilize and support appropriate educational interventions such as, but not limited to,
         the following:
         - Psychosocial support and services
         - Teaching and learning materials
         - Conduct of life skill education and alternative delivery modes
         - School clean-up
         - Emergency feeding programs
         - Minor repairs of school facilities
         - Life-saving supplies for education (health, nutrition, protection)
     f. Support the Lead Agency’s appeal for international assistance

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

   A. The Education Cluster lead agency will coordinate all requests and updating of reports for
      emergency education services in affected areas;

   B. All cluster members will make available all necessary operational resources that will be
      used in providing such emergency education services; and

   C. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices will utilize their respective
      internal personnel during disaster response. Additional personnel requirements shall be
      coordinated through NDRRMC in collaboration with all Council members.

V. COMMAND AND CONTROL

   A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and base their actions
      as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition
   B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
      (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.
      1. Succession of Command:
         a. Education Cluster Lead (DepEd DRRMS)
         b. Education Cluster Members
      2. Inter-agency Communication System Support

For the entire duration of operations, the existing means of communications will be utilized.
However, the Emergency Telecommunication Cluster will be activated once communication is cut-
off from the affected areas.
                                                                                                  95

   Management of the Dead and the Missing Cluster (MDM)
   (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number: ______ of ______
Issuing Agency: National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue: Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan: National Disaster Response Plan


I. RATIONALE

In emergency or disaster management, most efforts are being concentrated on the management of
the living victims while very least considerations are being given to the dead and the missing to the
extent that there are no clear specific tasks and assigned agencies to handle them. The major
disasters in the past years served as eye opener to the affected governments in giving focus and
attention to the management of the dead and the missing (MDM). It is an accepted reality that MDM
is a major component of the over-all management of consequences of disasters.

Retrieval operation of all dead casualties is a critical service and a very tedious responsibility in
managing disasters, with the aim of providing closure to the affected families. The demand for the
speedy identification of human remains is a challenge and requires an efficient system of
coordination between the national government agencies (NBI, PNP-CL, DOH) and the LGU.

The NDRRMC, through the Management of the Dead and the Missing (MDM) Cluster, has a critical
role in providing standards and guidelines in the proper handling of human remains (storage,
identification, transfer and final disposal), building the capacities and capabilities of all member
agencies, ensuring that legal norms are followed, and guaranteeing that the dignity of the deceased
and their families is respected in accordance with their cultural values and religious beliefs. (DOH:
AO18.s2007).

II. OBJECTIVE

The Management of the Dead and Missing Cluster aims to provide policies, standards, guidelines,
systems and procedures to institutionalize MDM in all concerned agencies and stakeholders at all
levels during emergencies and disasters.

Specifically, the Cluster aims to:
   a. Provide assistance in the proper identification and disposition of human remains in a
        sanitary and dignified manner with caution to prevent negative psychological and social
        impact on the bereaved family and the community;
   b. Strengthen coordination, collaboration and partnerships among agencies and stakeholders
        (non-government agencies, international humanitarian country teams, private sector) of
        MDM at all levels (national, regional and local government units); and
   c. Establish resource-sharing mechanisms among key players in the MDM.
                                                                                                  96

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

On orders, the MDM Cluster operations aim to enhance the government’s capacity in ensuring the
proper identification and disposition of human remains, guaranteeing that the dignity of the
deceased and their families is respected in accordance with their cultural values and religious
beliefs during emergencies and disasters.

The DILG, as lead of the cluster, shall head the operations and coordinate all support and resource
requirements among member-agencies and their activities in order to address/augment MDM
needs in the affected areas.

The MDM Cluster will have four (4) major activities:

   a.   Disaster Victim Identification
   b.   Final Arrangement for the dead
   c.   Management of the missing persons
   d.   Management of the bereaved families

The recovery and retrieval of human remains shall be done through the different Search and Rescue
Units (SARs) and shall be coordinated with the SRR Cluster. The SRR Cluster will ensure that the
retrieved human remains underwent decontamination process before turn-over to the MDM
Cluster.

Disaster Victim Identification

The National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) shall lead the activities needed for proper identification
and accounting of all declared human remains, supported by experts from PNP-CL, AFP, BFP and
DOH. The medico legal officer of NBI shall issue the Certificate of Identification of all
processed/examined and identified bodies, while the Local Health Officer shall issue the Certificate
of Death. The NBI will be guided by the current guidelines drafted for the proper management of
the dead and the missing.

Final Arrangement for the Dead

The DILG, through the Local Government Units, shall lead the final arrangement for the dead. All
identified human remains and body parts shall be turned over to the rightful/legitimate claimant as
identified by the LGU and will be responsible for the ultimate disposal. For identified dead
foreigners, embassies shall be immediately informed, through the International Humanitarian
Assistance Cluster (IHAC), and the repatriation of these bodies shall be their responsibility.

The LGU shall be responsible for the final disposition of the unidentified bodies to be buried in the
collective or individual graves, marked with their unique case numbers and/ or labels. Further, LGU
shall consult the community and religious leaders regarding the final disposition of the unidentified
bodies.

Management of the Missing Persons

The PNP shall lead the Management of the Missing Persons, with the support from the DSWD, PRC,
DOH, DOT, DFA and NBI.

A person can only be considered missing upon the report of the relatives or other concerned
persons to the local police station. The PNP shall verify the identity of the reported missing
person/s from the records of its Warrant Section along with the verification of DSWD from its
                                                                                                      97

records of Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL), and a certification from the Punong Barangay
that the reported missing person is a resident of the affected community. In exceptional cases such
as huge magnitude calamities, the latest National Census shall be the basis for validating reports of
missing persons. The PNP shall immediately inform the Incident Commander, who initiates active
search and rescue / retrieval and provides feedback.

The DSWD, through the Provincial/City/Municipal Social Welfare Office (P/C/MSWDO), shall
establish Social Welfare Inquiry Desks for data generation and information management of missing
persons presumed to be dead during the disaster, and their surviving families.

The validated list of missing persons presumed to be dead shall be submitted to the DILG for
endorsement to the NDRRMC and for the issuance of the Certificate of Missing Person Presumed to
be Dead.

Management of the Bereaved Families

The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) is the lead agency in the over-all
management of the bereaved families. DepEd, PRC, DOH and other development partners shall
provide assistance and resource augmentation on the over-all management of the bereaved families
for the following:

    -    Physiological needs to the bereaved shall include: Food Assistance; Financial Assistance;
         Livelihood Assistance; Clothing Assistance; Shelter Assistance; Management of the Orphans;
         and Food/Cash for Work;

    -    Social needs of the bereaved in terms shall include: Family/Peer Support System; Social
         Welfare Inquiry Desk/Information Center; Educational Assistance and Legal Needs; and

    -    Psychological needs of the bereaved shall include: Psychological First Aid and other Special
         Needs like Psychiatric or Mental Health Services.

The OCD Regional Offices shall coordinate with other agencies to facilitate the processing of
requirements for the benefit claims of the bereaved families:

    -    Certification from the Punong Barangay that the claimant is the legal beneficiary and a
         resident of the barangay;
    -    Incident Report from the local PNP or the LDRRMC;
    -    Death certificate from the local civil registrar; and
    -    Endorsement for payment of benefits from LDRRMC

In the event of incidents resulting to the identification of foreign national casualties or a rising need
for international assistance to augment additional capacities and resources on MDM, coordination
shall be done through the International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster (IHAC).

Lead and Member Agencies

The following are the key players and actors in the implementation of this concept.

   1. Lead Cluster Agency: DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
      (DILG)

        a) During Phase
          a. Activate the MDM Cluster at the national level;
                                                                                              98

      b. Coordinate with the Office of Civil Defense for the confirmation of all available MDM
         Teams of all national agencies for possible deployment;
      c. Submit to the NDRRMC a list of available government MDM Teams for immediate
         possible deployment;
      d. Meet with Response Cluster to do scenario building activities to determine the projected
         areas for deployment of MDM Teams. This includes the system for receiving MDM
         Teams from international agencies and INGOs;
      e. Deploy MDM Teams to the projected affected areas and its adjacent LGU/s;
      f. Deploy pre-positioned MDM Teams to assist the affected areas. MDM Teams are to
         coordinate with the LCEs of the affected areas for proper endorsement to the Incident
         Command posts on ground;
      g. Collect status reports and requests of the deployed MDM Teams on ground;
      h. Submit status reports, requests and proposed actions to the NDRRMC to integrate all
         activities at the NDRRMC Operations Center;
      i. Establish command posts at the Manila office and at the affected areas for multi-MDM
         Teams including those from international agencies and INGOs;
      j. Coordinate with other response clusters for their MDM requirements;
      k. Deploy batches of MDM Teams for augmentation at the affected areas;
      l. Coordinates with the LGU/s to determine the areas for proper management of mass
         dead; and
      m. Submit the MDM Task Force status reports to the NDRRMC.

    b) Post Disaster Phase
          Prepares and submits a report of all operations to the NDRRMC.

2. Cluster Member Agencies

  A. OFFICE OF THE CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)

    a) During Disaster Phase
       a. Monitor and collect situation reports from the LDRRM Operations Center;
       b. Alert national MDM groups for possible activation;
       c. Coordinate the prepositioning of MDM groups in critical areas;
       d. Issue and disseminate activation orders;
       e. Monitor the situation on the ground from the LDRRM OpCen;
       f. Receive request for MDM augmentation;
       g. Issue and disseminate deployment orders; and
       h. Deploy MDM augmentation groups in coordination with the DRRMCs and Cluster head.

    b) Post Disaster Phase
       a. Consolidate and prepare report for submission; and
       b. Conduct debriefing of MDM groups at the national level in coordination with DOH.

   B. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH)
       a. Provide support for medical services/ MHPSS for responders and bereaved families;
       b. Provide technical assistance on health and safety concerns;
       c. Assist in validation and reporting of casualties; and
       d. Augment manpower for the DVI process.

   C. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)
         Assist the DILG in providing resources and psychosocial assistance to the bereaved
         families.
                                                                                                   99

      D. PHILIPPINE RED CROSS (PRC)
         a. Assist in the provision of resources both personnel and logistical equipment (cadaver
            bags) needed in the management of the dead through its deployed SRR teams as the
            need arises and gap is identified.
         b. Assist in establishing welfare desks to facilitate information gathering on affected
            population as well as missing persons and mobilize its RC143 volunteers to conduct
            tracing in restoring family links (RFL).
         c. Assist in the management of bereaved families through the conduct of community based
            psychosocial support and referral.

      E. NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (NBI)
          a. Lead the identification of the declared human remains;
          b. Coordinate and manage the requirements of identifying and burial of all dead victims
             with the MDM Task Force;
          c. Submit status reports to the Cluster Lead including request for additional manpower to
             hasten the process of identification and proper burial of the dead; and
          d. Coordinate with the Interpol for the appropriate guidelines for identification and
             documentation of the dead victim/s.

      F. DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (DFA), through the International Humanitarian
         Assistance Cluster (IHAC)
             Provide assistance in informing families of all foreign nationals that are victims of the
             disaster.

      G. PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP) – Crime Laboratory (PNP-CL)
             Assist the NBI in the identification of human remains.

IV.      CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

         A. The DILG as Cluster Lead will coordinate all support requirements of member agencies
            in their activities to augment the affected areas during disasters.
         B. Concerned government agencies and their subordinate offices shall utilize their
            respective personnel. Additional personnel requirements shall be coordinated through
            the NDRRMC.

V.       COMMAND AND CONTROL

         A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and base their
            actions as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition
         B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations
            Center (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

             1. Succession of Command:
                a. MDM Cluster Lead (DILG)
                b. PNP-CL
                c. NBI

           2. Interagency Communication System Support
The MDM Cluster must have its own effective and efficient internal telecommunication support
system with high-speed data transmission capability in order to accurately transmit data and
communicate with its support agencies/units to facilitate the performance of its tasks and
responsibilities.
                                                                                                100

Philippine  International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster
(PIHAC) - (NDRP for Earthquake and Tsunami)

Copy Number:          ________ of ______
Issuing Agency:        National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
Place of Issue:        Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City
Date of Issue:
Integrated Plan:       National Disaster Response Plan for Hydro-Meteorological Hazards


I.   RATIONALE

The vulnerability of the Philippines to major and increasingly frequent disasters and addressing the
“new normal” necessitates the need for the country to enhance existing coordinating mechanisms
among various government agencies, non-government stakeholders and foreign-based government
agencies. There is also a need to formulate and enhance appropriate policies responsive to the
immediate demands of disaster risk reduction management and to allocate sufficient resources to
effectively respond to such emergencies.

The proposed Enhanced Policy Guidelines on the Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance
(PIHA) improves the NDCC Circular Nos. 01 and 02, series of 2007, and 01, series of 2008 entitled
“Revised Implementing Guidelines of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on International
Humanitarian Assistance Network (IHAN)” and establishes/creates the Philippine International
Humanitarian Assistance Cluster (PIHAC) reflected under National Disaster Response Plan for
Hydro-Meteorological Hazards and National Disaster Response Plan for Earthquakes and Tsunamis.

The PIHA shall provide for the institutional framework and mechanism for coordination of
incoming and outgoing international humanitarian assistance and response efforts as a result of
natural disasters through the PIHAC being the primary coordinating body on all concerns arising
therefrom.

It also aims to enhance and institutionalize existing mechanisms and policies on international
humanitarian assistance to include the Philippine One-Stop-shop Facilities in international airports
and seaports, among others. And, formulate new policy frameworks and mechanisms on issues
arising from the handling of international humanitarian assistance from various national and inter-
government and non-government stakeholders to effectively and efficiently process the entry and
distribution of international humanitarian assistance.

Further, it aims to formulate policies and mechanisms incorporating international efforts taking on
the “whole of society approach” by taking into account the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster
Management and Emergency Response (AADMER), “One ASEAN, One Response”, and East Asia
Summit (EAS) at the regional level, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the United Nations
(UN) and European Union (EU) at the global level, without disregard however, on due recognition
to the primacy and sovereignty of the Philippines as the host country on decisions arising from this
matter.

In summary, the PIHA shall spell out the enhanced policy guidelines on international humanitarian
assistance; the operational guidelines specifically on sub-clusters on Financial Donations,
International Humanitarian Workers and In-Kind Donations; Reporting Mechanism; Transparency,
Accounting, and Auditing Requirements; Functions of the Government Agencies and
Instrumentalities and Stakeholders; and the PIHAC’s roles and functions.
                                                                                                101


Moreover, it seeks to pool the collective resources and institutional knowledge of the government,
non-government and the international community and create a more synergistic collaboration in
addressing the challenges posed by the issues arising from disaster risk reduction and management
in the country.

II. OBJECTIVE

The Philippine International Humanitarian Assistance Cluster (PIHAC) aims to provide a timely,
efficient and effective delivery of humanitarian assistance from various stakeholders.

III. CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS

Upon the “Call for International Assistance” and/or requirement for international coordination, the
PIHAC shall undertake the following activities specifically for the hydro-meteorological response
operations, to wit:

    A. Pre-Disaster Phase
       Gather and disseminate the necessary relief and recovery and rehabilitation requirements
       and information to the international community.

    B. During Disaster Phase
       Ensure the implementation of the PIHA policy guidelines.

    C. Post Disaster Phase
       Ensure that information pertaining to the updates on the international humanitarian
       assistance to the international community.

    1. Organizational Structure

The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) is the Cluster Lead of the PIHAC. It shall be divided into
three (3) sub-clusters comprising of in-kind donations, financial donations and international relief
teams.

       The composition are as follows:

       A. In-kind Donations Sub Cluster:

           Lead Agency: DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)

           Core Members: representatives from Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Department
           of Health (DOH), Commission on Audit (COA), Bureau of Customs (BoC), Department of
           Finance (DOF), Department of Transportation (DOTr), Office of Civil Defense (OCD),
           Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of National Defense (DND), Food and Drug
           Administration (FDA), Presidential Management Staff (PMS), Department of Public
           Works and Highways (DPWH), National Economic Development Authority (NEDA)

           Contributing Agencies: representatives from Department of the Interior and Local
           Government (DILG), Commission on Filipinos Overseas (CFO), National Food Authority
           (NFA), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), Philippines Drug Enforcement Agency
           (PDEA), National Telecommunication Commission (NTC), Philippine Postal Corporation
           (PHILPOST), Department of Education (DepEd)
                                                                                          102

     B. International Relief Teams Sub Cluster:

        Lead Agencies: DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH) and DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL
        DEFENSE (DND) through the ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP)

        Core Members: representatives from Department of Social Welfare and Development
        (DSWD), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Philippine National Volunteer Service
        Coordinating Agency (PNVSCA), Department of the Interior and Local Government
        (DILG), Philippine Red Cross (PRC), National Youth Commission (NYC), Office of Civil
        Defense (OCD), Department of National Defense (DND), Bureau of Immigration (BI),
        Bureau of Quarantine (BOQ), Presidential Commission on Visiting Forces (PCVF),
        Department of Justice (DOJ)

        Contributing Agencies: representatives from Presidential Management Staff (PMS),
        Professional Regulatory Commission (ProRegCom), Commission on Filipinos Overseas
        (CFO), National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA), Department of Public Works
        and Highways (DPWH), National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA), National
        Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP), Department of Science and
        Technology (DOST), Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC),
        Bureau of Animal Industry (BAI)

     C. Financial Donations Sub Cluster:

        Lead Agencies: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE (DOF) and DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND
        MANAGEMENT (DBM)

        Core Members: representatives from Department of Social Welfare and Development
        (DSWD), Department of Health (DOH), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Office of
        Civil Defense (OCD), Department of National Defense (DND), Commission on Audit
        (COA), National Economic Development Authority (NEDA)

        Contributing Agencies: representatives from Bureau of Treasury (BTr), Bangko
        Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), Commission on Filipinos
        Overseas (CFO), Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), Presidential
        Management Staff (PMS), Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), Department of
        Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education (CHED)


2.   FUNCTIONS OF        GOVERNMENT        AGENCIES     AND     INSTRUMENTALITIES        AND
     STAKEHOLDERS

     A. ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES (AFP)
        Shall ensure the facilitation of the activation of the MNCC and CMCC and alignment of
       such guidelines to PIHAC.

     B. BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY (BAI)
        Shall facilitate and expedite processing and releasing without unnecessary delays of
        animals brought by international humanitarian teams, necessary in the relief and early
        recovery operations.
                                                                                            103


C. BUREAU OF CUSTOMS (BoC)
   Shall facilitate and expedite processing and releasing of international donations
   shipment from customs custody intended for calamity declared areas without
   unnecessary delays.

     Shall institute the necessary controls and safeguards against unlawful importations of
     in-kind donations for a purpose other than its delivery and distribution to calamity
     declared areas.

D. BUREAU OF IMMIGRATION (BI)
   Shall implement policies on the granting of Special Non-immigrants visas to duly
   accredited international experts and personnel to provide humanitarian assistance in
   disaster-stricken areas.

E. BUREAU OF QUARANTINE (BOQ)
   Shall ensure that international humanitarian workers are subjected to the regular
   screening procedures at the port of entry.

F. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE (DOF)
   Shall ensure the approval of the donations intended for humanitarian assistance.

G. DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (DFA) shall undertake the following:

     a. Shall lead PIHAC and implement its guidelines.; and
     b. Shall facilitate and negotiate cooperation agreements with foreign countries
        concerning international humanitarian assistance in the event of natural disasters or
        major emergencies.

H. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH), through the Health Emergency Management
   Bureau, shall:

     a. Facilitate the entry and deployment of IMTs, including coordination with the
        Professional Regulatory Commission (ProRegCom) that regulates and oversees all
        medical practitioners in the Philippines; and
     b. Facilitate the entry and clearance of donations of all health and health-related
        products of foreign origin, including, but not limited to, processed foods,
        pharmaceutical products, medical supplies and equipment;

I.   DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (DOJ)
       Shall facilitate the entry of duly accredited international experts and personnel to
        provide humanitarian assistance in disaster-stricken areas as Special Non-
        immigrants, free from payment of immigration and alien registration fees, under
        Section 47(a)(2) of the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940 as amended.

J.   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE (DND)
        Shall facilitate processing of diplomatic clearances for military aircraft and sea craft
        from donor countries and provide favorable endorsement of rehabilitation
        equipment to the Presidential Management Staff.
                                                                                                  104

       K. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (DOTr)

           a.   Shall facilitate clearances and monitor the movement of aircrafts and vessels
                transporting humanitarian teams, and in-kind donations through the Philippine
                Coast Guard (PCG), and concerned airport authorities and port authorities in the
                country; and

           b.     Shall provide regulations on the entry and use of drones in disaster relief
                operations.

       L. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD)

           a. Shall facilitate the release of received donations to intended beneficiaries, according
              to priority disaster-affected area or as requested by donors; and

           b. Shall determine the termination of PIHARC (OSS) in relation to the declaration of the
              transition phase of response to early recovery activities upon the approval of the
              NDRRMC.

       M. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)
          Shall facilitate issuance of clearance of all health and health related products, including,
          but not limited to, processed foods, pharmaceutical products, medical supplies and
          equipment.

       N. OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE (OCD)
          Shall facilitate and mediate any concern/s arising between and among member agencies
          relative to PIHA issues;

       O. PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT STAFF (PMS)
          Shall coordinate with the PIHAC for the movement of International Humanitarian
          Assistance.

       P. DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (DILG)
          Shall consolidate and report all negotiated, secured and received international and in-
          country humanitarian assistance of the Local Government Units.

IV. CONCEPT OF SUSTAINMENT

     A. The PIHAC will coordinate all movement of incoming international humanitarian assistance
        before, during and after emergency/disaster situation; and

     B. Further, the PIHAC shall comply with all instructions/directives set by the National DRRM
        Council.

V.   COMMAND AND CONTROL

     A. Command Relationship – all DRRM actors and key players will refer and base their actions
        as prescribed in IRR of R.A. 10121, Rule 3, Section 2. Composition

     B. Command Center – National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center
        (NDRRMOC), Camp General Emilio Aguinaldo, Quezon City.

       1. Succession of Command:
                                                                                         105

         a.   PIHAC Cluster Lead (DFA)
         b.   DOF through BOC
         c.   OCD

      2. Interagency Communication System Support

The PIHA Cluster must have its own effective and efficient internal telecommunication support
system with high-speed data transmission capability in order to accurately transmit data and
communicate with its support agencies/units to facilitate the performance of its tasks and
responsibilities.
                                                                                             106


REFERENCES
ASEAN Joint Disaster Response Plan, series of 2016

Emergency Response Preparedness (ERP) Guidance, October 2014, Inter-Agency Standing
      Committee, Draft for Field Testing

Republic Act No. 10121, (2010) 7925, (1994). Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
       Act of 2010. An Act Strengthening the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
       System, Providing for the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management and
       Institutionalizing the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan, Appropriating
       Funds Therefore and for other Purposes: Quezon City, 14th Congress of the Philippines.

NDRP for Hydro-Meteorological Version 1, series of 2014

NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 25, s. 2014, Subject: Guidelines in the Conduct of Rapid Damage
     Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA) signed by the Executive Director, NDRRMC

NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 66, s. 20146, Subject: Common and Fundamental Operational
     Datasets (CODs and FODs) signed by the Executive Director, NDRRMC

NDRRMC Operations Center SOP, series of 2016.
